AND (y is one of the hypernyms of x) AND AND (z is SYNONYM of y) AND AND (z is SYNONYM of anaphor) then Cast_in_Chain(Anaphor,antecedent) (Riloff and Jones 1999) note that the performance of the mutual bootstrapping algorithm can deteriorate rapidly if erroneous rules are entered. To make the algorithm more robust we use the same solution by introducing a second level of bootrapping. outer level, called most reliable based on semantic consistency and discard all the others before restarting the mutual bootstrapping loop again. In our experiments we have retained only those rules for which the new performance, given by the F-measure was larger than the median of the past four loops. The formula for the van Rijsbergen's F-measure combines precision the recall = 6 Evaluation To measure the performance of COCKTAIL we have trained the system on 30 MUC-6 and MUC-7 texts and tested it on the remaining 30 documents. computed the the Fperformance measures have been obtained automatically using the MUC-6 coreference scoring program (Vilain et al. 1995). Table 4 lists the results. Precision Recall F-measure rules 87.1% 61.7% 72.3% rules combined 91.3% 58.6% 71.8% +bootstrapping 92.0% 73.9% 81.9% Table 4: Bootstrapping effect on COCKTAIL Table 4 shows that the seed set of rules had good precision but poor recall. By combining the rules with the entropy-based measure, we obtained further enhancement in precision, but the recall dropped. The application of the bootstrapping methodology determined an enhancement of recall, and thus of the F-measure. In the future we intend to compare the overall effect of rules that recognize referential expressions on the overall performance of the system. 7 Conclusion We have introduced a new data-driven method for corefresolution, implemented in the system. Unlike other knowledge-poor methods for corefresolution (Baldwin 1997) (Mitkov 1998), COCKits most performant rules through massive data, generated by its component. Furthermore, by using an entropy-based method we determine the best partition of corefering expressions chains. rules are learned by applying a bootstrapping methodology that uncovers additional semantic consistency data. References Breck Baldwin. 1997. CogNIAC: high precision coreference with limited knowledge and linguistic resources.