is composed of interdependent variables. The test used to evaluate a model gives preference to those that have the fewest number of interdependencies, thereby selecting models expressing only the most systematic variable interactions. To summarize the method, one first identifies informative contextual features (where &quot;informative&quot; is a well-defined notion, discussed in Section 2). Then, out of all possible decomposable models characterizing interdependency relationships among the selected variables, those that are found to produce good approximations to the data are identified (using the test mentioned above) and one of those models is used to perform disambiguation. Thus, we are able to use multiple contextual features without the need for untested assumptions regarding the form of the model. Further, approximating the joint distribution of all variables with a model identifying only the most important systematic interactions among variables limits the number of parameters to be estimated, supports computational efficiency, and provides an understanding of the data. The biggest limitation associated with this method is the need for large amounts of sense-tagged data. Because asymptotic distributions of the test statistics are used, the validity of the results obtained using this approach are compromised when it is applied to sparse data (this point is discussed further in Section 2). To test the method of model selection presented in this paper, a case study of the disambiguation of the performed. selected because it has been shown in previous studies to be a difficult word to disambiguate. We selected as the set of tags all non-idiomatic noun senses of defined in the electronic version of Longman's Dictionary of Contemporary English (LDOCE) ([23]). Using the models produced in this study, we are able to assign an sense tag to every usage of a heldout test set with 78% accuracy. Although it is difficult to compare our results to those reported for previous disambiguation experiments, as will be discussed later, we feel these results are encouraging. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a more complete definition of the Abstract Most probabilistic classifiers used for word-sense disambiguation have either been based on only one contextual feature or have used a model that is simply assumed to characterize the interdependencies among multiple contextual features. In this paper, a different approach to formulating a probabilistic model is presented along with a case study of the performance of models produced in this manner for the disambiguation of the noun describe a method for formulating probabilistic models that use multiple contextual features for word-sense disambiguation, without requiring untested assumptions regarding the form of the model. Using this approach, the joint distribution of all variables is described by only the most systematic variable interactions, thereby limiting the number of parameters to be estimated, supporting computational efficiency, and providing an understanding of the data.