Tagged Dependency -.— Tagged Adjacency -e— L. Pattern 3 5 Training scheme (integers denote window widths) Figure 5: Accuracy using a tagged corpus for various training schemes data would make a difference, the freely available Brill tagger (Brill, 1993) was applied to the corpus. Since no manually tagged training data is available for our corpus, the tagger's default rules were used (these rules were produced by Brill by training on the Brown corpus). This results in rather poor tagging accuracy, so it is quite possible that a manually tagged corpus would produce better results. Three training schemes have been used and the tuned analysis procedures applied to the test set. Figure 5 shows the resulting accuracy, with accuracy values from figure 3 displayed with dotted lines. If anything, admitting additional training data based on the tagger introduces more noise, reducing the accuracy. However, for the pattern training scheme an improvement was made to the dependency model, producing the highest overall accuracy of 81%. 4 Conclusion The experiments above demonstrate a number of important points. The most general of these is that even quite crude corpus statistics can provide information about the syntax of compound nouns. At the very least, this information can be applied in broad coverage parsing to assist in the control of search. I have also shown that with a corpus of moderate size it is possible to get reasonable results without using a tagger or parser by employing a customised training pattern. While using windowed co-occurrence did not help here, it is possible that under more data sparse conditions better performance could be achieved by this method. The significance of the use of conceptual association deserves some mention. I have argued that without it a broad coverage system would be impossible. This is in contrast to previous work on conceptual association where it resulted in little improvement on a task which could already be performed. In this study, not only has the technique proved its worth by supporting generality, but through generalisation of training information it outperforms the equivalent lexical association approach given the same information. Amongst all the comparisons performed in these experiments one stands out as exhibiting the greatest contrast. In all experiments the dependency model provides a substantial advantage over the adjacency model, even though the latter is more prevalent in proposals within the literature. This result is in accordance with the informal reasoning given in section 1.3. The model also has the further commendation that it predicts correctly the observed proportion of left-branching compounds found in two independently extracted test sets. In all, the most accurate technique achieved an accuracy of 81% as compared to the 67% achieved by guessing left-branching. Given the high frequency of occurrence of noun compounds in many texts, this suggests that the use of these techniques in probabilistic parsers will result in higher performance in broad coverage natural language processing. 5 Acknowledgements This work has received valuable input from people too numerous to mention. The most significant contributions have been made by Richard Buckland, Robert Dale and Mark Dras. I am also indebted to Vance Gledhill, Mike Johnson, Philip Resnik, Richard Sproat, Wilco ter Stal, Lucy Vanderwende and Wobcke. Financial support is gratefully ack- 53 nowledged from the Microsoft Institute and the Australian Government.