Introduction. It is well known that Expectation-Maximization (EM) performs poorly in unsupervised induction of linguistic structure (Carroll and Charniak, 1992;Merialdo, 1994; Klein, 2005; Smith, 2006). In ret rospect one can certainly find reasons to explain this failure: after all, likelihood does not appear in thewide variety of linguistic tests proposed for identi fying linguistic structure (Fromkin, 2001).This paper focuses on unsupervised part-ofspeech (POS) tagging, because it is perhaps the sim plest linguistic induction task. We suggest that onereason for the apparent failure of EM for POS tagging is that it tends to assign relatively equal numbers of tokens to each hidden state, while the em pirical distribution of POS tags is highly skewed, like many linguistic (and non-linguistic) phenomena(Mitzenmacher, 2003). We focus on first-order Hid den Markov Models (HMMs) in which the hidden state is interpreted as a POS tag, also known as bitag models. In this setting we show that EM performs poorlywhen evaluated using a ?1-to-1 accuracy? evalua tion, where each POS tag corresponds to at most one hidden state, but is more competitive when evaluatedusing a ?many-to-1 accuracy? evaluation, where sev eral hidden states may correspond to the same POStag. We explain this by observing that the distribution of hidden states to words proposed by the EM estimated HMMs is relatively uniform, while the empirical distribution of POS tags is heavily skewed towards a few high-frequency tags. Based on this,we propose a Bayesian prior that biases the sys tem toward more skewed distributions and show that this raises the 1-to-1 accuracy significantly. Finally, we show that a similar increase in accuracy can be achieved by reducing the number of hidden states in the models estimated by EM. There is certainly much useful information that bitag HMMs models cannot capture. Toutanova etal. (2003) describe a wide variety of morphological and distributional features useful for POS tagging, and Clark (2003) proposes ways of incorporat ing some of these in an unsupervised tagging model. However, bitag models are rich enough to capture at least some distributional information (i.e., the tag 296for a word depends on the tags assigned to its neighbours). Moreover, more complex models add addi tional complicating factors that interact in ways stillpoorly understood; for example, smoothing is gen erally regarded as essential for higher-order HMMs,yet it is not clear how to integrate smoothing into un supervised estimation procedures (Goodman, 2001; Wang and Schuurmans, 2005). Most previous work exploiting unsupervised training data for inferring POS tagging models has focused on semi-supervised methods in the in which the learner is provided with a lexicon specifying the possible tags for each word (Merialdo, 1994; Smith and Eisner, 2005; Goldwater and Griffiths, 2007) or a small number of ?prototypes? for each POS(Haghighi and Klein, 2006). In the context of semi supervised learning using a tag lexicon, Wang and Schuurmans (2005) observe discrepencies between the empirical and estimated tag frequencies similar to those observed here, and show that constraining the estimation procedure to preserve the empiricalfrequencies improves tagging accuracy. (This ap proach cannot be used in an unsupervised setting since the empirical tag distribution is not available). However, as Banko and Moore (2004) point out, the accuracy achieved by these unsupervised methodsdepends strongly on the precise nature of the su pervised training data (in their case, the ambiguity of the tag lexicon available to the system), which makes it more difficult to understand the behaviour of such systems.
Evaluation. . All of the experiments described below have the same basic structure: an estimator is used to infera bitag HMM from the unsupervised training cor pus (the words of Penn Treebank (PTB) Wall Street Journal corpus (Marcus et al, 1993)), and then the resulting model is used to label each word of that corpus with one of the HMM?s hidden states. This section describes how we evaluate how well thesesequences of hidden states correspond to the gold standard POS tags for the training corpus (here, the PTB POS tags). The chief difficulty is determining the correspondence between the hidden states and the gold-standard POS tags.Perhaps the most straightforward method of es tablishing this correspondence is to deterministically map each hidden state to the POS tag it co-occurs most frequently with, and return the proportion of the resulting POS tags that are the same as the POS tags of the gold-standard corpus. We call this themany-to-1 accuracy of the hidden state sequence be cause several hidden states may map to the same POS tag (and some POS tags may not be mapped to by any hidden states at all). As Clark (2003) points out, many-to-1 accuracy has several defects. If a system is permitted to posit an unbounded number of hidden states (which is notthe case here) then it can achieve a perfect many-to 1 accuracy by placing every word token into its own unique state. Cross-validation, i.e., identifying themany-to-1 mapping and evaluating on different subsets of the data, would answer many of these objections. Haghighi and Klein (2006) propose constrain ing the mapping from hidden states to POS tags so that at most one hidden state maps to any POS tag. This mapping is found by greedily assigning hidden states to POS tags until either the hidden states or POS tags are exhausted (note that if the number ofhidden states and POS tags differ, some will be unas signed). We call the accuracy of the POS sequence obtained using this map its 1-to-1 accuracy. Finally, several authors have proposed using information-theoretic measures of the divergence between the hidden state and POS tag sequences. Goldwater and Griffiths (2007) propose using the Variation of Information (VI) metric described byMeila? (2003). We regard the assignments of hidden states and POS tags to the words of the cor pus as two different ways of clustering those words,and evaluate the conditional entropy of each clus tering conditioned on the other. The VI is the sum of these conditional entropies. Specifically, given a corpus labeled with hidden states and POS tags, if p?(y), p?(t) and p?(y, t) are the empirical probabilities of a hidden state y, a POS tag t, and the cooccurance of y and t respectively, then the mutual information I , entropies H and variation of information VI are defined as follows: H(Y ) = ? ? y p?(y) log p?(y) H(T ) = ? ? t p?(t) log p?(t) I(Y, T ) = ? y,t p?(y, t) log p?(y, t) p?(y)p?(t) H(Y |T ) = H(Y )? I(Y, T ) 297 H(T |Y ) = H(T )? I(Y, T ) VI (Y, T ) = H(Y |T ) +H(T |Y ) As Meila? (2003) shows, VI is a metric on the space of probability distributions whose value reflects the divergence between the two distributions, and only takes the value zero when the two distributions are identical.
Maximum Likelihood via. . Expectation-Maximization There are several excellent textbook presentations of Hidden Markov Models and the Forward-Backward algorithm for Expectation-Maximization (Jelinek, 1997; Manning and Schu?tze, 1999; Bishop, 2006),so we do not cover them in detail here. Conceptu ally, a Hidden Markov Model generates a sequence of observations x = (x0, . . . , xn) (here, the wordsof the corpus) by first using a Markov model to gen erate a sequence of hidden states y = (y0, . . . , yn)(which will be mapped to POS tags during evalua tion as described above) and then generating each word xi conditioned on its corresponding state yi. We insert endmarkers at the beginning and ending of the corpus and between sentence boundaries, and constrain the estimator to associate endmarkers with a state that never appears with any other observationtype (this means each sentence can be processed in dependently by first-order HMMs; these endmarkers are ignored during evaluation).In more detail, the HMM is specified by multi nomials ?y and ?y for each hidden state y, where ?y specifies the distribution over states following y and ?y specifies the distribution over observations x given state y. yi | yi?1 = y ? Multi(?y) xi | yi = y ? Multi(?y) (1)We used the Forward-Backward algorithm to perform Expectation-Maximization, which is a procedure that iteratively re-estimates the model param eters (?, ?), converging on a local maximum of the likelihood. Specifically, if the parameter estimate attime ` is (?(`), ?(`)), then the re-estimated parame ters at time `+ 1 are: ?(`+1)y?|y = E[ny?,y]/E[ny] (2) ?(`+1)x|y = E[nx,y]/E[ny] 6.95E+06 7.00E+06 7.05E+06 7.10E+06 7.15E+06 0 250 500 750 1000 ? lo g lik el ih oo d Iteration Figure 1: Variation in negative log likelihood with increasing iterations for 10 EM runs from different random starting points.where nx,y is the number of times observation x oc curs with state y, ny?,y is the number of times state y? follows y and ny is the number of occurences of state y; all expectations are taken with respect to the model (?(`), ?(`)).We took care to implement this and the other al gorithms used in this paper efficiently, since optimal performance was often only achieved after several hundred iterations. It is well-known that EM oftentakes a large number of iterations to converge in likelihood, and we found this here too, as shown in Fig ure 1. As that figure makes clear, likelihood is still increasing after several hundred iterations.Perhaps more surprisingly, we often found dramatic changes in accuracy in the order of 5% occur ing after several hundred iterations, so we ran 1,000 iterations of EM in all of the experiments describedhere; each run took approximately 2.5 days compu tation on a 3.6GHz Pentium 4. It?s well-known thataccuracy often decreases after the first few EM it erations (which we also observed); however in our experiments we found that performance improves again after 100 iterations and continues improving roughly monotonically. Figure 2 shows how 1-to-1 accuracy varies with iteration during 10 runs from different random starting points. Note that 1-to-1 accuracy at termination ranges from 0.38 to 0.45; a spread of 0.07.We obtained a dramatic speedup by working directly with probabilities and rescaling after each ob servation to avoid underflow, rather than workingwith log probabilities (thanks to Yoshimasa Tsu 298 0.35 0.37 0.39 0.41 0.43 0.45 0.47 0 250 500 750 10001 to -1 a ccura cy IterationFigure 2: Variation in 1-to-1 accuracy with increas ing iterations for 10 EM runs from different random starting points. ruoka for pointing this out). Since we evaluatedthe accuracy of the estimated tags after each iteration, it was important that decoding be done effi ciently as well. While most researchers use Viterbidecoding to find the most likely state sequence, maximum marginal decoding (which labels the observa tion xi with the state yi that maximizes the marginal probability P(yi|x, ?, ?)) is faster because it re-uses the forward and backward tables already constructed by the Forward-Backward algorithm. Moreover, in separate experiments we found that the maximum marginal state sequence almost always scored higherthan the Viterbi state sequence in all of our evalua tions, and at modest numbers of iterations (up to 50) often scored more than 5% better.We also noticed a wide variance in the perfor mance of models due to random initialization (both ? and ? are initially jittered to break symmetry); thiswide variance was observed with all of the estima tors investigated in this paper. This means we cannot compare estimators on the basis of single runs, so we ran each estimator 10 times from different random starting points and report both mean and standard deviation for all scores. Finally, we also experimented with annealing, in which the parameters ? and ? are raised to the power 1/T , where T is a ?temperature? parameter that isslowly lowered toward 1 at each iteration accord ing to some ?annealing schedule?. We experimented with a variety of starting temperatures and annealing schedules (e.g., linear, exponential, etc), but wereunable to find any that produced models whose like 0E+0 1E+5 2E+5 Fre quen cy Tag / hidden state (sorted by frequency) PT B V B EM EM 25 Figure 3: The average number of words labeled with each hidden state or tag for the EM, VB (with ?x = ?y = 0.1) and EM-25 estimators (EM-25 is the EM estimator with 25 hidden states). lihoods were significantly higher (i.e., the models fit better) than those found without annealing. The evaluation of the models produced by the EM and other estimators is presented in Table 1. It is difficult to compare these with previous work, but Haghighi and Klein (2006) report that in a completely unsupervised setting, their MRF model, which uses a large set of additional features and amore complex estimation procedure, achieves an average 1-to-1 accuracy of 41.3%. Because they provide no information about the variance in this accuracy it is difficult to tell whether there is a signifi cant difference between their estimator and the EM estimator, but it is clear that when EM is run longenough, the performance of even very simple models like the bitag HMM is better than generally rec ognized.As Table 1 makes clear, the EM estimator pro duces models that are extremely competitive in many-to-1 accuracy and Variation of Information, but are significantly worse in 1-to-1 accuracy. Wecan understand these results by comparing the dis tribution of words to hidden states to the distribution of words to POS tags in the gold-standard evaluation corpus. As Figure 3 shows, the distribution of words to POS tags is highly skewed, with just 6 POS tags, NN, IN, NNP, DT, JJ and NNS, accounting for over 55% of the tokens in the corpus. By contrast, the EM distribution is much flatter. This also explains why the many-to-1 accuracy is so much better than the one-to-one accuracy; presumably several hidden 299 Estimator 1-to-1 Many-to-1 VI H(T |Y ) H(Y |T ) EM (50) 0.40 (0.02) 0.62 (0.01) 4.46 (0.08) 1.75 (0.04) 2.71 (0.06) VB(0.1, 0.1) (50) 0.47 (0.02) 0.50 (0.02) 4.28 (0.09) 2.39 (0.07) 1.89 (0.06) VB(0.1, 10?4) (50) 0.46 (0.03) 0.50 (0.02) 4.28 (0.11) 2.39 (0.08) 1.90 (0.07) VB(10?4, 0.1) (50) 0.42 (0.02) 0.60 (0.01) 4.63 (0.07) 1.86 (0.03) 2.77 (0.05) VB(10?4, 10?4) (50) 0.42 (0.02) 0.60 (0.01) 4.62 (0.07) 1.85 (0.03) 2.76 (0.06) GS(0.1, 0.1) (50) 0.37 (0.02) 0.51 (0.01) 5.45 (0.07) 2.35 (0.09) 3.20 (0.03) GS(0.1, 10?4) (50) 0.38 (0.01) 0.51 (0.01) 5.47 (0.04) 2.26 (0.03) 3.22 (0.01) GS(10?4, 0.1) (50) 0.36 (0.02) 0.49 (0.01) 5.73 (0.05) 2.41 (0.04) 3.31 (0.03) GS(10?4, 10?4) (50) 0.37 (0.02) 0.49 (0.01) 5.74 (0.03) 2.42 (0.02) 3.32 (0.02) EM (40) 0.42 (0.03) 0.60 (0.02) 4.37 (0.14) 1.84 (0.07) 2.55 (0.08) EM (25) 0.46 (0.03) 0.56 (0.02) 4.23 (0.17) 2.05 (0.09) 2.19 (0.08) EM (10) 0.41 (0.01) 0.43 (0.01) 4.32 (0.04) 2.74 (0.03) 1.58 (0.05)Table 1: Evaluation of models produced by the various estimators. The values of the Dirichlet prior param eters for ?x and ?y appear in the estimator name for the VB and GS estimators, and the number of hidden states is given in parentheses. Reported values are means over all runs, followed by standard deviations. 10 runs were performed for each of the EM and VB estimators, while 5 runs were performed for the GSestimators. Each EM and VB run consisted of 1,000 iterations, while each GS run consisted of 50,000 it erations. For the estimators with 10 runs, a 3-standard error 95% confidence interval is approximately the same as the standard deviation. states are being mapped onto a single POS tag. This is also consistent with the fact that the cross-entropy H(T |Y ) of tags given hidden states is relatively low(i.e., given a hidden state, the tag is relatively predictable), while the cross-entropy H(Y |T ) is rela tively high.
Bayesian estimation via Gibbs Sampling. . and Variational Bayes A Bayesian estimator combines a likelihood termP(x|?, ?) and a prior P(?, ?) to estimate the poste rior probability of a model or hidden state sequence. We can use a Bayesian prior to bias our estimatortowards models that generate more skewed distributions. Because HMMs (and PCFGs) are prod ucts of multinomials, Dirichlet distributions are a particularly natural choice for the priors since they are conjugate to multinomials, which simplifies both the mathematical and computational aspects of theproblem. The precise form of the model we investi gated is: ?y | ?y ? Dir(?y) ?y | ?x ? Dir(?x) yi | yi?1 = y ? Multi(?y) xi | yi = y ? Multi(?y)Informally, ?y controls the sparsity of the state-to state transition probabilities while ?x controls thesparsity of the state-to-observation emission proba bilities. As ?x approaches zero the prior strongly prefers models in which each hidden state emitsas few words as possible. This captures the intu ition that most word types only belong to one POS,since the minimum number of non-zero state-toobservation transitions occurs when each observa tion type is emitted from only one state. Similarly, as ?y approaches zero the state-to-state transitions become sparser.There are two main techniques for Bayesian esti mation of such models: Markov Chain Monte Carlo(MCMC) and Variational Bayes (VB). MCMC en compasses a broad range of sampling techniques, including component-wise Gibbs sampling, which is the MCMC technique we used here (Robert and Casella, 2004; Bishop, 2006). In general, MCMCtechniques do not produce a single model that char acterizes the posterior, but instead produce a stream of samples from the posterior. The application of MCMC techniques, including Gibbs sampling, to HMM inference problems is relatively well-known: see Besag (2004) for a tutorial introduction and Goldwater and Griffiths (2007) for an applicationof Gibbs sampling to HMM inference for semi 300 supervised and unsupervised POS tagging. The Gibbs sampler produces state sequences y sampled from the posterior distribution: P(y|x, ?) ? P(x,y|?, ?)P(?|?y)P(?|?x) d? d?Because Dirichlet priors are conjugate to multinomials, it is possible to integrate out the model parameters ? and ? to yield the conditional distribu tion for yi shown in Figure 4. For each observation xi in turn, we resample its state yi conditioned on the states y?i of the other observations; eventually the distribution of state sequences converges to the desired posterior. Each iteration of the Gibbs sampler is much faster than the Forward-Backward algorithm (both take time linear in the length of the string, but for an HMM with s hidden states, each iteration of the Gibbs sampler takes O(s) time while each iteration of the Forward-Backward algorithm takes O(s2) time), so we ran 50,000 iterations of all samplers (which takes roughly the same elapsed time as 1,000 Forward-Backward iterations). As can be seen from Table 1, the posterior state sequences we obtained are not particularly good.Further, when we examined how the posterior like lihoods varied with increasing iterations of Gibbs sampling, it became apparent that the likelihood was still increasing after 50,000 iterations. Moreover,when comparing posterior likelihoods from different runs with the same prior parameters but differ ent random number seeds, none of the likelihoods crossed, which one would expect if the samplers had converged and were mixing well (Robert and Casella, 2004). Just as with EM, we experimented with a variety of annealing regimes, but were unable to find any which significantly improved accuracy or posterior likelihood.We also experimented with evaluating state se quences found using maximum posterior decoding(i.e., model parameters are estimated from the posterior sample, and used to perform maximum posterior decoding) rather than the samples from the pos terior produced by the Gibbs sampler. We found that the maximum posterior decoding sequences usually scored higher than the posterior samples, but the scores converged after the first thousand iterations.Since the posterior samples are produced as a byproduct of Gibbs sampling while maximum poste rior decoding requires an additional time consuming step that does not have much impact on scores, we used the posterior samples to produce the results in Table 1.In contrast to MCMC, Variational Bayesian in ference attempts to find the function Q(y, ?, ?) thatminimizes an upper bound of the negative log likeli hood (Jordan et al, 1999): ? log P(x) = ? log ? Q(y, ?, ?) P(x,y, ?, ?) Q(y, ?, ?) dy d? d? ? ? Q(y, ?, ?) log P(x,y, ?, ?) Q(y, ?, ?) dy d? d?(3) The upper bound in (3) is called the Variational Free Energy. We make a ?mean-field? assumption thatthe posterior can be well approximated by a factor ized modelQ in which the state sequence y does not covary with the model parameters ?, ? (this will be true if, for example, there is sufficient data that the posterior distribution has a peaked mode): P(x,y, ?, ?) ? Q(y, ?, ?) = Q1(y)Q2(?, ?) The calculus of variations is used to minimize theKL divergence between the desired posterior distri bution and the factorized approximation. It turnsout that if the likelihood and conjugate prior be long to exponential families then the optimalQ1 andQ2 do too, and there is an EM-like iterative pro cedure that finds locally-optimal model parameters (Bishop, 2006). This procedure is especially attractive for HMMinference, since it involves only a minor modification to the M-step of the Forward-Backward algo rithm. MacKay (1997) and Beal (2003) describe Variational Bayesian (VB) inference for HMMs in detail, and Kurihara and Sato (2006) describe VBfor PCFGs (which only involves a minor modifica tion to the M-step of the Inside-Outside algorithm). Specifically, the E-step for VB inference for HMMs is the same as in EM, while theM-step is as follows: ??(`+1)y?|y = f(E[ny?,y] + ?y)/f(E[ny] + s?y) (4) ??(`+1)x|y = f(E[nx,y] + ?x)/f(E[ny] +m?x) f(v) = exp(?(v)) ?(v) = (v > 7) ? g(v ? 12) : (?(v + 1)? 1)/v g(x) ? log(x) + 0.04167x?2 + 0.00729x?4 +0.00384x?6 ? 0.00413x?8 . . . (5) 301 P(yi|x,y?i, ?) ? ( nxi,yi + ?x nyi +m?x ) ( nyi,yi?1 + ?y nyi?1 + s?y ) ( nyi+1,yi + I(yi?1 = yi = yi+1) + ?y nyi + I(yi?1 = yi) ) Figure 4: The conditional distribution for state yi used in the Gibbs sampler, which conditions on the states y?i for all observations except xi. Here m is the number of possible observations (i.e., the size of the vocabulary), s is the number of hidden states and I(?) is the indicator function (i.e., equal to one if its argument is true and zero otherwise), nx,y is the number of times observation x occurs with state y, ny?,y is the number of times state y? follows y, and ny is the number of times state y occurs; these counts are from (x?i,y?i), i.e., excluding xi and yi. 0 1 2 0 1 2 Figure 5: The scaling function y = f(x) = exp?(x) (curved line), which is bounded above by the line y = x and below by the line y = x? 0.5. where ? is the digamma function (the derivative ofthe log gamma function; (5) gives an asymptotic ap proximation), and the remaining quantities are just as in the EM updates (2), i.e., nx,y is the number of times observation x occurs with state y, ny?,y is the number of times state y? follows y, ny is the number of occurences of state y, s is the number of hiddenstates and m is the number of observations; all ex pectations are taken with respect to the variational parameters (??(`), ??(`)).A comparison between (4) and (2) reveals two dif ferences between the EM and VB updates. First, the Dirichlet prior parameters ? are added to the expected counts. Second, these posterior counts(which are in fact parameters of the Dirichlet pos terior Q2) are passed through the function f(v) = exp?(v), which is plotted in Figure 5. When v  0, f(v) ? v ? 0.5, so roughly speaking, VB for multinomials involves adding ??0.5 to the expected counts when they are much larger than zero, where ? is the Dirichlet prior parameter. Thus VB canbe viewed as a more principled version of the well known ad hoc technique for approximating Bayesian estimation with EM that involves adding ??1 to the expected counts. However, in the ad hoc approach the expected count plus ??1 may be less than zero,resulting in a value of zero for the corresponding parameter (Johnson et al, 2007; Goldwater and Grif fiths, 2007). VB avoids this problem because f(v) is always positive when v  0, even when v is small. Note that because the counts are passed through f , the updated values for ?? and ?? in (4) are in general not normalized; this is because the variational free energy is only an upper bound on the negative log likelihood (Beal, 2003).We found that in general VB performed much bet ter than GS. Computationally it is very similar to EM, and each iteration takes essentially the same time as an EM iteration. Again, we experimented with annealing in the hope of speeding convergence,but could not find an annealing schedule that significantly lowered the variational free energy (the quan tity that VB optimizes). While we had hoped that theBayesian prior would bias VB toward a common solution, we found the same sensitivity to initial condi tions as we found with EM, so just as for EM, we ran the estimator for 1,000 iterations with 10 different random initializations for each combination of prior parameters. Table 1 presents the results of VB runs with several different values for the Dirichlet priorparameters. Interestingly, we obtained our best per formance on 1-to-1 accuracy when the Dirchlet prior?x = 0.1, a relatively large number, but best per formance on many-to-1 accuracy was achieved with a much lower value for the Dirichlet prior, namely ?x = 10?4. The Dirichlet prior ?y that controls 302sparsity of the state-to-state transitions had little ef fect on the results. We did not have computational resources to fully explore other values for the prior (a set of 10 runs for one set of parameter values takes 25 computer days). As Figure 3 shows, VB can produce distributions of hidden states that are peaked in the same way that POS tags are. In fact, with the priors used here, VB produces state sequences in which only a subset ofthe possible HMM states are in fact assigned to ob servations. This shows that rather than fixing the number of hidden states in advance, the Bayesian prior can determine the number of states; this idea is more fully developed in the infinite HMM of Beal et al. (2002) and Teh et al (2006). EM already performs well in terms of the many-to-1 accuracy, but we wondered if there might be some way to improve its 1-to-1 accuracy and VI score. In section 3 we suggested that one reason for its poorperformance in these evaluations is that the distri butions of hidden states it finds tend to be fairly flat, compared to the empirical distribution of POS tags. As section 4 showed, a suitable Bayesian priorcan bias the estimator towards more peaked distribu tions, but we wondered if there might be a simpler way of achieving the same result. We experimented with dramatic reductions in the number of hidden states in the HMMs estimated by EM. This should force the hidden states to bemore densely populated and improve 1-to-1 accu racy, even though this means that there will be nohidden states that can possibly map onto the less fre quent POS tags (i.e., we will get these words wrong). In effect, we abandon the low-frequency POS tags in the hope of improving the 1-to-1 accuracy of the high-frequency tags. As Table 1 shows, this markedly improves both the 1-to-1 accuracy and the VI score. A 25-state HMM estimated by EM performs effectively as wellas the best VB model in terms of both 1-to-1 accu racy and VI score, and runs 4 times faster because it has only half the number of hidden states. 6 Conclusion and future work. This paper studied why EM seems to do so badly in HMM estimation for unsupervised POS tagging. In fact, we found that it doesn?t do so badly at all: thebitag HMM estimated by EM achieves a mean 1-to 1 tagging accuracy of 40%, which is approximately the same as the 41.3% reported by (Haghighi and Klein, 2006) for their sophisticated MRF model. Then we noted the distribution of words to hidden states found by EM is relatively uniform, comparedto the distribution of words to POS tags in the eval uation corpus. This provides an explanation of why the many-to-1 accuracy of EM is so high while the 1-to-1 accuracy and VI of EM is comparatively low. We showed that either by using a suitable Bayesian prior or by simply reducing the number of hidden states it is possible to significantly improve both the 1-to-1 accuracy and the VI score, achieving a 1-to-1 tagging accuracy of 46%. We also showed that EM and other estimators take much longer to converge than usually thought, and often require several hundred iterations to achieve optimal performance. We also found that there is considerable variance in the performance of all of these estimators, so in general multiple runs fromdifferent random starting points are necessary in or der to evaluate an estimator?s performance. Finally, there may be more sophisticated ways of improving the 1-to-1 accuracy and VI score thanthe relatively crude methods used here that primarily reduce the number of available states. For example, we might obtain better performance by us ing EM to infer an HMM with a large number of states, and then using some kind of distributionalclustering to group similar HMM states; these clusters, rather than the underlying states, would be in terpreted as the POS tag labels. Also, the Bayesian framework permits a wide variety of different priors besides Dirichlet priors explored here. For example, it should be possible to encode linguistic knowledge such markedness preferences in a prior, and there are other linguistically uninformative priors, such the ?entropic priors? of Brand (1999), that may be worth exploring. AcknowledgementsI would like to thank Microsoft Research for providing an excellent environment in which to con duct this work, and my friends and colleagues at Microsoft Research, especially Bob Moore, ChrisQuirk and Kristina Toutanova, for their helpful com ments on this paper. 303