No Figure 4 SAT after where 254 is a translation of the latter part of 218 and the early part of 219: When a proton strikes a gas nucleus, it produces three kinds of pion, of which one kind decays into two gamma rays. The gamma rays travel close to the original trajectory of the proton, and the model predicts they will be beamed toward the earth at just two points on the pulsars orbit around the companion star. Trifft em Proton auf einen Atomkern in dieser Gashfille, werden drei Arten von Pionen erzeugt. Die neutralen Pionen zerfallen in jeweils zwei Gammaquanten, die sich beinahe in dieselbe Richtung wie das urspriingliche Proton bewegen. Nach der Modellvorstellung gibt es gerade zwei Positionen im Umlauf des Pulsars urn semen Begleitstern, bei denen die Strahlung in Richtung zum Beobachter auf der Erde ausgesandt wird. Another example is provided by English sentences 19 and 20, which appear in German as sentences 21 and 22. However the latter part of English sentence 19 is in fact transferred to sentence 22 in the German. This is also unmistakable in the final results. Notice also, in this example, that the definition of &quot;photon&quot; has become a parenthetical expression at the beginning of the second German sentence, a fact which is not reflected. The other end of the cosmic-ray energy spectrum is defined somearbitrarily: any quantum greater than electron volts arriving from space is considered a cosmic ray. The definition encompasses not only particles but also gamma-ray photons, which are quanta of electromagnetic radiation. 2 4 4 4-5 ; 136 Martin Kay and Martin Riischeisen Text-Translation Alignment Le Correctness of sentence alignment in the various passes of the algorithm. Pass Correctness Coverage Constraint in SAT of SAT by AST 1 100% 12% 4% 2 100% 47% 17% 3 100% 89% 38% 4 99.7% 96% 41% Das untere Ende des Spektrums der kosmischen Strahlen ist verhaltnismai3ig unscharf definiert. Jedes Photon (Quant der elektromagnetischen Strahlung) Teilchen mit einer Energie von mehr als Elektronenvolt, das aus dem Weltraum eintrifft, bezeichnet man als kosmischen Strahl. frequently occurred in our data that sentences that separated by colons or semicolons in the original appeared as completely distinct sentences in the German translation. Indeed, the common usage in the two languages would probably have been better represented if we had treated colons and semicolons as sentence separators, along with periods, question marks, and the like. There are, of course, situations in which these punctuation marks are used in other ways, but they are considerably less frequent and, in any case, it seems that our program would almost always make the right associations. An example involving the colon is to be found in sentence 142 of the original, translated as sentences 163 and 164: The absorption lines established a lower limit on the distance of Cygnus X-3: it must be more distant than the farthest hydrogen cloud, which is believed to lie about 37,000 light-years away, near the edge of the galaxy. dieser Absorptionslinie kann eine untere Grenze der Entvon Cygnus X bestimmen. Die Quelle mu13 jenseits am weitesten entfernten Wasserstoff-Wolke sein, also weiter als ungefahr 37000 Lichtjahre entfernt, am Rande der Milchstrai3e. sentence 197, containing semicolon, is translated by German sentences 228 and 229: The estimate is conservative; because it is based on the gamma rays observed arriving at the earth, it does not take into account the likelihood that Cygnus X emits cosmic rays in all directions. Dies ist eine vorsichtige Absch5tzung. Sie ist nur aus den Gammastrahlen-Daten abgeleitet, die auf der Erde gemessen werden; daI3 Cygnus X-3 wahrscheirtlich kosmische Strahlung in alle Richtungen aussendet, ist dabei noch nicht beriicksichtigt. 137 Computational Linguistics Volume 19, Number 1 German Sentence No CA e• tc•' x • 10 20 30 40 50 English Sentence No Figure 5 alignment of the first of the test texts: true alignment (dots) and hypothesis of the SAT after the first pass (circles) and after the second pass (crosses). Table 3 summarizes the accuracy of the algorithm as a function of the number of passes. The (thresholded) SAT is evaluated by two criteria: the number of correct by the total number alignments, and—since the SAT does not necessarily give an alignment for every sentence—the coverage, i.e., the number of sentences with at least one entry relative to the total number of sentences. An alignment is said to be correct if the SAT contains exactly the numbers of the sentences that are complete or partial translations of the original sentence. The coverage of 96% of the SAT in pass 4 is as much as one would expect, since the remaining nonaligned sentences are one-zero alignments, most of them due to the German subheadings that are not part of the English version. The table also shows that the AST always provides a significant number of candidates for alignment with each sentence before a pass: the fourth column gives the number of true sentence alignments relative to the total number of candidates in the AST. Recall that the final alignment is always a subset of the hypotheses in the AST in every preceding pass. Figure 5 shows the true sentence alignment for the first 50 sentences (dots), and how the algorithm discovered them: in the first pass, only a few sentences are set into correspondence (circles); after the second pass (crosses) already almost half of the correspondences are found. Note that there are no wrong alignments in the first two passes. In the third pass, almost all of the remaining alignments are found (for the first 50 sentences in the figure: all), and a final pass usually completes the alignment. Our algorithm produces very favorable results when allowed to converge gradually. Processing time in the original LISP implementation was high, typically several hours for each pass. By trading CPU time for memory massively, the time needed by a C++ implementation on a Sun 4/75 was reduced to 1.7 mm for the first pass, 0.8 mm for the second, and 0.5 min for the third pass in an application to this pair of articles. (Initialization, i.e., reading the files and building up the data structures, takes another 0.6 min in the beginning.) It should be noted that a naive implementation of 138 Martin Kay and Martin Roscheisen Text-Translation Alignment the algorithm without using the appropriate data structures can easily lead to times that are a factor of 30 higher and do not scale up to larger texts. The application of our method to a text that we put together from the Hansard corpus had essentially no problem in identifying the correct sentence alignment in a process of five passes. The alignments for the first 1000 sentences of the English text were checked by hand, and seven errors were found; five of them occurred in sentences where sentence boundaries were not correctly identified by the program of periods that did not mark a sentence boundary and were identified such by very simple preprocessing program. The other two errors involved two short sentences for which the SAT did not give an alignment. Processing time increased essentially linearly (per pass): the first pass took 8.3 min, the second 3.2 mm, and it further decreased until the last pass, which took 2.1 min. (Initialization took 4.2 min.) Note that the error rate depends crucially on the kind of &quot;annealing schedule&quot; used: if the thresholds that allow a word pair in the WAT to influence the SAT are lowered too fast, only a few passes are needed, but accuracy deteriorates. For example, in an application where the process terminated after only three passes, the accuracy was only in the eighties (estimated on the basis of the first 120 sentences of the English Hansard text checked by hand). Since processing time after the first pass is usually already considerably lower, we have found that a high accuracy can safely be attained when more passes are allowed than are actually necessary. In order to evaluate the sensitivity of the algorithm to the lengths of the texts that are to be aligned, we applied it to text samples that ranged in length from 10 to 1000 sentences, and examined the accuracy of the WAT after the first pass; that is, more precisely, the number of word pairs in the WAT that are valid translations relative to the total number of word pairs with a similarity of not less than 0.7 (the measurements are cross-validated over different texts). The result is that this accuracy increases asymptotically to 1 with the text length, and is already higher than 80% for text length of 100 sentences (which sufficient to reach an almost perfect alignment in the end). Roughly speaking, the accuracy is almost 1 for texts longer than 150 sentences, and around 0.5 for text length in the lower range from 20 to 60. In other words, texts of a length of more than 150 sentences are suitable to be processed in this way; text fragments shorter than 80 sentences do not have a high proportion of correct word pairs in the first WAT, but further experiments showed that the final alignment for texts of this length is, on average, again almost perfect: the drawback of a less accurate initial WAT is apparently largely compensated for by the fact that the AST is also narrower for these texts; however, the variance in the alignment accuracies is significantly higher. 5. Related Work Since we addressed the text translation alignment problem in 1988, a number of researchers, among them Gale and Church (1991) and Brown, Lai, and Mercer (1991), have worked on the problem. Both methods are based on the observation that the length of text unit is highly correlated to the length of the translation of this unit, no matter whether length is measured in number of words or in number of characters (see Figure 6). Consequently, they are both easier to implement than ours, though not necessarily more efficient. The method of Brown, Lai, and Mercer (1991) is based on a hidden Markov model for the generation of aligned pairs of corpora, whose parameters are estimated from a large text. For an application of this method to the Canadian Hansard, good results are reported. However, the problem was also considerably facilitated by the way the implementation made use of Hansard-specific comments 139 Linguistics Volume 19, Number German: Length in wards CO German: Length in chars 40 60 80 120 200 400 600 800 English: Length in words English: Length in chars Figure 6 Lengths of Aligned Paragraphs are Correlated: Robust regression between lengths of aligned paragraphs. Left: length measured in words. Right: length measured in characters. and annotations: these are used in a preprocessing step to find anchors for sentence alignment such that, on average, there are only ten sentences in between. Moreover, corpus is for the near literalness of its translations, and it is therefore unclear to what extent the good results are due to the relative ease of the problem. This would be an important consideration when comparing various algorithms; when the algorithms are actually applied, it is clearly very desirable to incorporate as much prior knowledge (say, on potential anchors) as possible. Moreover, long texts can almost always be expected to contain natural anchors, such as chapter section headings, at which to make an priori Gale and Church (1991) note that their method performed considerably better when lengths of sentences were measured in number of characters instead of in number of words. Their method is based on a probabilistic model of the distance between and a dynamic programming algorithm is used to minimize the total aligned Their implementation assumes that character in one language gives rise to, on average, one character in the other language.' In our texts, one character in English on average gives rise to somewhat more than 1.2 characters in German, and the correlation between the lengths (in characters) of aligned paragraphs in the two languages was with 0.952 lower than the 0.991 that are menin Gale and Church (1991), which supports our impression that the we used are hard texts to align, but it is not clear to what extent this would deteriorate the results. In applications to economic reports from the Union Bank of Switzerland, the method performs very well on simple alignments (one-to-one, oneto-two), but has at the moment problems with complex matches. The method has the 8 Recall that, in a similar way, we assumed in our implementation that one sentence in one language gives rise to, on average, n/rn sentences in the other language (see first footnote in Section 2.3). 140 Martin Kay and Martin Riischeisen Text-Translation Alignment advantage of associating a score with pairs of sentences so that it is easy to extract a subset for which there is a high likelihood that the alignments are correct. Given the simplicity of the methods proposed by Brown, Lai, and Mercer and Gale and Church, either of them could be used as a heuristic in the construction of the initial AST in our algorithm. In the current version, the number of candidate sentence pairs that are considered in the first pass near the middle of a text contributes disproportionally to the cost of the computation. In fact, as we remarked earlier, the of this step is proposed modification would effectively make it linear. 6. Future Work For most practical purposes, the alignment algorithm we have described produces very satisfactory results, even when applied to relatively free translations. There are doubtless many places in which the algorithm itself could be improved. For example, it is clear that the present method of building the SAT favors associations between long sentences, and this is not surprising, because there is more information in long sentences. But we have not investigated the extent of this bias and we do not therefore know it as appropriate. The present algorithm rests on being able to identify one-to-one associations between certain words, notably technical terms and proper names. It is clear from a brief inspection of Table 2 that very few correspondences are noticed among everyday words and, when they are, it is usually because those words also have precise technical uses. The very few exceptions include &quot;only&quot;/&quot;nur&quot; and 'the&quot;/&quot;die-.&quot; The pair &quot;per&quot;/&quot;pro&quot; might also qualify but if the languages afford any example of a scientific preposition, this is surely it. The most interesting further developments would be in the direction of loosening up this dependence on one-to-one associations both because this would present a very significant challenge and also because we are convinced that our present method identifies essentially all the significant one-to-one associations. There are two obvious kinds of looser associations that could be investigated. One would consist of connections between a single vocabulary item in one language and two or more in the other, or even between several items in one language and several in the other. The other would involve connections—one–one, one–many, or many–many—between phrases or recurring sequences. We have investigated the first of these enough to satisfy ourselves that there is latent information on one-to-many associations in the text, and that it can be revealed by suitable extensions of our methods. However, it is clear that the combinatorial problems associated with this approach are severe, and pursuing it would require much fine tuning of the program and designing much more effective ways of indexing the most important data structures. The key to reducing the combinatorial explosion probably lies in using tables of similarities such as those the present algorithm uses to suggest combinations of items that would be worth considering. If such an approach could be made efficient enough, it is even possible that it would provide a superior way of solving the problem for which our heuristic methods of morphological analysis were introduced. Its superiority would come from the fact that it would not depend on words being formed by concatenation, but would also accommodate such phenomena as umlaut, ablaut, vowel harmony, and the nonconcatenative process of Semitic morphology. The problems of treating recurring sequences are less severe. Data structures, such as the Patricia tree (Knuth 1973; pp. 490-493) provide efficient means of identifying all such sequences and, once identified, the data they provide could be added to 141 Computational Linguistics Volume 19, Number 1 the WAT much as we now add the results of morphological analysis. Needless to say, this would only allow for uninterrupted sequences. Any attempt to deal with discontinuous sequences would doubtless also involve great combinatorial problems. These avenues for further development are intriguing and would surely lead to interesting results. But it is unlikely that they would lead to much better sets of associations among sentences than are to be found in the SATs that our present program produces, and it was mainly these results that we were interested in from the outset. The other avenues we have mentioned concern improvements in the WAT which, for us, was always a secondary interest.