1 Introduction. The Berkeley FrameNet project' is producing frame-semantic descriptions of several thousand English lexical items and backing up these descriptions with semantically annotated attestations from contemporary English corpora2. These descriptions are based on hand-tagged semantic annotations of example sentences extracted from large text corpora and systematic analysis of the semantic patterns they exemplify by lexicographers and linguists. The primary emphasis of the project therefore is the encoding, by humans, of semantic knowledge in machine-readable form. The intuition of the lexicographers is guided by and constrained by the results of corpus-based research using highperformance software tools. The semantic domains to be covered are: HEALTH CARE, CHANCE, PERCEPTION, COMMUNICATION, TRANSACTION, TIME, SPACE, BODY (parts and functions of the body), MOTION, LIFE STAGES, SOCIAL CONTEXT, EMOTION and COGNITION. The results of the project are (a) a lexical resource, called the FrameNet database3, and (b) associated software tools. The database has three major components (described in more detail below: PLE SENTENCES which illustrate each of the potential realization patterns identified in the formula;4 and (d) links to the FRAME DATABASE and to other machine-readable resources such as WordNet and COMLEX. marked up to exemplify the semantic and morphosyntactic properties of the lexical items. (Several of these are schematized in Fig. 2). These sentences provide empirical support for the lexicographic analysis provided in the frame database and lexicon entries. These three components form a highly relational and tightly integrated whole: elements in each may point to elements in the other two. The database will also contain estimates of the relative frequency of senses and complementation patterns calculated by matching the senses and patterns in the hand-tagged examples against the entire BNC corpus. The FrameNet work is in some ways similar to efforts to describe the argument structures of lexical items in terms of case-roles or thetaroles,5 but in FrameNet, the role names (called frame elements or FEs) are local to particular conceptual structures (frames); some of these are quite general, while others are specific to a small family of lexical items. For example, the TRANSPORTATION frame, within the domain of MOTION, provides MOVERS, MEANS of transportation, and PATHS;6 6The semantic frames for individual lexical units are typically &quot;blends&quot; of more than one basic frame; from our point of view, the so-called &quot;linking&quot; patterns proposed in LFG, HPSG, and Construction Grammar, operate on higher-level frames of action (giving agent, patient, instrument), motion and location (giving theme, location, source, goal, path), and experience (giving experiencer, stimulus, content), etc. In some but not all cases, the assignment of syntactic correlates to frame elements could be mediated by mapping them to the roles of one of the more abstract frames. 6A detailed study of motion predicates would require a finer-grained analysis of the Path element, separating out Source and Goal, and perhaps Direction and Area, but for a basic study of the transportation predicates such refined analysis is not necessary. In any case, our subframes associated with individual words inherit all of these while possibly adding some of their own. Fig. 1 shows some of the subframes, as discussed below. The DRIVING frame, for example, specifies a DRIVER (a principal MOVER), a VEHICLE (a particularization of the MEANS element), and potentially CARGO or RIDER as secondary movers. In this frame, the DRIVER initiates and controls the movement of the VEHICLE. For most verbs in this frame, DRIVER or VEHICLE can be realized as subjects; VEHICLE, RIDER, or CARGO can appear as direct objects; and PATH and VEHICLE can appear as oblique complements. Some combinations of frame elements, or Frame Element Groups (FEGs), for some real corpus sentences in the DRIVING frame are shown in Fig. 2. A RIDING_1 frame has the primary mover role as RIDER, and allows as VEHICLE those driven by others.7 In grammatical realizations of this frame, the RIDER can be the subject; the VEHICLE can appear as a direct object or an oblique complement; and the PATH is generally realized as an oblique. The FrameNet entry for each of these verbs will include a concise formula for all semanwork includes the separate analysis of the frame semantics of directional and locational expressions. tic and syntactic combinatorial possibilities, together with a collection of annotated corpus sentences in which each possibility is exemplified. The syntactic positions considered relevant for lexicographic description include those that are internal to the maximal projection of the target word (the whole VP, AP, or NP for target V, A or N), and those that are external to the maximal projection under precise structural conditions; the subject, in the case of VP, and the subject of support verbs in the case of AP and NP. 8 Used in NLP, the FrameNet database should make it possible for a system which finds a valence-bearing lexical item in a text to know (for each of its senses) where its individual arguments are likely to be found. For example, once a parser has found the verb drive and its direct object NP, the link to the DRIVING frame will suggest some semantics for that NP, e.g. that a person as direct object probably represents the RIDER, while a non-human proper noun is probably the VEHICLE. For practical lexicography, the contribution of the FrameNet database will be its presentation of the full range of use possibilities for individual words, documented with corpus data, the model examples for each use, and the statistical information on relative frequency.
2 Organization and Workflow. The computational side of the FrameNet project is directed at efficiently capturing human insights into semantic structure. The majority of the work involved is marking text with semantic tags, specifying (again by hand) the structure of the frames to be treated, and writing dictionary-style entries based the results of annotation and a priori descriptions. With the exception of the example sentence extraction component, all the software modules are highly interactive and have substantial user interface requirements. Most of this functionality is provided by WWW-based programs written in PERL. Four processing steps are required produce the FrameNet database of frame semantic representations: (a) generating initial descriptions of semantic and syntactic patterns for use in corpus queries and annotation (&quot;Preparation&quot;), (b) extracting good example sentences (&quot;Subcorpus Extraction&quot;), (c) marking (by hand) the constituents of interest (&quot;Annotation&quot;), and (d) building a database of lexical semantic representations based on the annotations and other data (&quot;Entry Writing&quot;). These are discussed briefly below and shown in Fig. 3. As work on the project has progressed, we have defined several explicit roles which project participants play in the various steps. these roles are referred to as Vanguard (1.1 in Fig. 3), Annotators (3.1) and Rearguard (4.1). These are purely functional designations: the same person may play different roles at different times.9 pares the initial descriptions of frames, including lists of frames and frame elements, and adds these to the Frame Database (5.1) using the Frame Description tool (1.2). The Vanguard also selects the major vocabulary items for the frame (the target words) and the syntactic patterns that need to be checked for each word, which are entered in the Lexical Database (5.2) by means of the Lexical Database Tool (1.3). 2. Subcorpus Extraction. Based on the Vanguard's work, the subcorpus extraction tools (2.2) produce a representative collection of sentences containing these words. This selection of examples is achieved through a hybrid process partially controlled by the preliminary lexical description of each lemma. Sentences containing the lemma are extracted from from a corpus and classified into subcorpora by syntactic pattern (2.2.1) using a CASCADE FILTER (2.2.2, 2.2.5, 2.2.6) representing a partial regular-expression grammar of English over part-of-speech tags (cf. Gahl (forthcoming)), formatted for annotation (2.2.4) , and automatically sampled (2.2.3) down to an appropriate number. (If these heuristics fail to find appropriate examples by means of syntactic patterns, sentences are selected using INTERACTIVE SELECreviews the skeletal lexical record created by the Vanguard, the annotated example sentences (5.3), and the FEGs extracted from them, and builds both the entries for the lemmas in the Lexical Database (5.2) and the frame descriptions in the Frame Database (5.1), using the Entry Writing Tools (4.2). '°We are building a &quot;constituent type identifier&quot; which will semi-automatically assign Grammatical Function (GF), and Phrase Type (PT) attributes to these FEmarked constituents, eliminating the need for Annotators to mark these.
3 Implementation 3.1 Data Model. The data structures described above are implemented in SGML.11 Each is described by a DTD, and these DTDs are structured to provide the necessary links between the components. The software suite currently supporting database development is an aggregate of existing software tools held together with PERL/CGI-based &quot;glue&quot;. In order to get the project started, we have depended on off-theshelf software which in some cases is not ideal for our purposes. Nevertheless, using these programs allowed us to get the project up and running within just a few months. We describe below in approximate order of application the programs used and their state of completion. &quot;Eventually, we plan to migrate to an XML data model, which appears to provide more flexibility while reducing complexity. Also, the FrameNet software is being developed on Unix, but we plan to provide crossplatform capabilities by making our tool suite web-based and XML-compatible. SGML files into HTML for convenient viewing on the web, etc. are being written in PERL. RCS maintains version control over most files.
4 Conclusion. At the time of writing, there is something in place for each of the major software components, though in some cases these are little more than stubs or &quot;toy&quot; implementations. Nearly 10,000 sentences exemplifying just under 200 lemmas have been annotated; there are over 20,000 frame element tokens marked in these example sentences. About a dozen frames have been specified, which refer to 47 named frame elements. Most of these annotations have been accomplished in the last few months since the software for corpus extraction, frame description, and annotation became operational. We expect the inventory to increase rapidly. If the proportions cited hold constant as the Framenet database grows, the final database of 5,000 lexical units may contain 250,000 annotated sentences and over half a million tokens of frame elements.