1 Introduction. This paper presents the results of the shared tasks of the 2009 EACL Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, which builds on three previous workshops (Koehn and Monz, 2006; CallisonBurch et al., 2007; Callison-Burch et al., 2008). There were three shared tasks this year: a translation task between English and five other European languages, a task to combine the output of multiple machine translation systems, and a task to predict human judgments of translation quality using automatic evaluation metrics. The performance on each of these shared task was determined after a comprehensive human evaluation. There were a number of differences between this year’s workshop and last year’s workshop: Beyond ranking the output of translation systems, we evaluated translation quality by having people edit the output of systems. Later, we asked annotators to judge whether those edited translations were correct when shown the source and reference translation. The primary objectives of this workshop are to evaluate the state of the art in machine translation, to disseminate common test sets and public training data with published performance numbers, and to refine evaluation methodologies for machine translation. All of the data, translations, and human judgments produced for our workshop are publicly available.1 We hope they form a valuable resource for research into statistical machine translation, system combination, and automatic evaluation of translation quality.
2 Overview of the shared translation and system combination tasks. The workshop examined translation between English and five other languages: German, Spanish, French, Czech, and Hungarian. We created a test set for each language pair by translating newspaper articles. We additionally provided training data and a baseline system. The test data for this year’s task was created by hiring people to translate news articles that were drawn from a variety of sources during the period from the end of September to mid-October of 2008. A total of 136 articles were selected, in roughly equal amounts from a variety of Czech, English, French, German, Hungarian, Italian and Spanish news sites:2 Hungarian: hvg.hu (10), Napi (2), MNO (4), N´epszabads´ag (4) Czech: iHNed.cz (3), iDNES.cz (4), Lidovky.cz (3), aktu´alnˇe.cz (2), Novinky (1) French: dernieresnouvelles (1), Le Figaro (2), Les Echos (4), Liberation (4), Le Devoir (9) Spanish: ABC.es (11), El Mundo (12) English: BBC (11), New York Times (6), Times of London (4), German: S¨uddeutsche Zeitung (3), Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (3), Spiegel (8), Welt (3) Italian: ADN Kronos (5), Affari Italiani (2), ASCA (1), Corriere della Sera (4), Il Sole 24 ORE (1), Il Quotidiano (1), La Republica (8) Note that Italian translation was not one of this year’s official translation tasks. The translations were created by the members of EuroMatrix consortium who hired a mix of professional and non-professional translators. All translators were fluent or native speakers of both languages. Although we made efforts to proofread all translations, many sentences still contain minor errors and disfluencies. All of the translations were done directly, and not via an intermediate language. For instance, each of the 20 Hungarian articles were translated directly into Czech, English, French, German, Italian and Spanish. The total cost of creating the test sets consisting of roughly 80,000 words across 3027 sentences in seven languages was approximately 31,700 euros (around 39,800 dollars at current exchange rates, or slightly more than $0.08/word). Previous evaluations additionally used test sets drawn from the Europarl corpus. Our rationale behind discontinuing the use of Europarl as a test set was that it overly biases towards statistical systems that were trained on this particular domain, and that European Parliament proceedings were less of general interest than news stories. We focus on a single task since the use of multiple test sets in the past spread our resources too thin, especially in the manual evaluation. As in past years we provided parallel corpora to train translation models, monolingual corpora to train language models, and development sets to tune parameters. Some statistics about the training materials are given in Figure 1. 109 word parallel corpus To create the large French-English parallel corpus, we conducted a targeted web crawl of bilingual web sites. These sites came from a variety of sources including the Canadian government, the European Union, the United Nations, and other international organizations. The crawl yielded on the order of 40 million files, consisting of more than 1TB of data. Pairs of translated documents were identified using a set of simple heuristics to transform French URLs into English URLs (for instance, by replacing fr with en). Documents that matched were assumed to be translations of each other. All HTML and PDF documents were converted into plain text, which yielded 2 million French files paired with their English equivalents. Text files were split so that they contained one sentence per line and had markers between paragraphs. They were sentence-aligned in batches of 10,000 document pairs, using a sentence aligner that incorporates IBM Model 1 probabilities in addition to sentence lengths (Moore, 2002). The document-aligned corpus contained 220 million segments with 2.9 billion words on the French side and 215 million segments with 2.5 billion words on the English side. After sentence alignment, there were 177 million sentence pairs with 2.5 billion French words and 2.2 billion English words. The sentence-aligned corpus was cleaned to remove sentence pairs which consisted only of numbers or paragraph markers, or where the French and English sentences were identical. The later step helped eliminate documents that were not actually translated, which was necessary because we did not perform language identification. After cleaning, the parallel corpus contained 105 million sentence pairs with 2 billion French words and 1.8 billion English words. In addition to cleaning the sentence-aligned parallel corpus we also de-duplicated the corpus, removing all sentence pairs that occured more than once in the parallel corpus. Many of the documents gathered in our web crawl were duplicates or near duplicates, and a lot of the text is repeated, as with web site navigation. We further eliminated sentence pairs that varied from previous sentences by only numbers, which helped eliminate template web pages such as expense reports. We used a Bloom Filter (Talbot and Osborne, 2007) to do de-duplication, so it may have discarded more sentence pairs than strictly necessary. After deduplication, the parallel corpus contained 28 million sentence pairs with 0.8 billion French words and 0.7 billion English words. We have crawled the news sources that were the basis of our test sets (and a few more additional sources) since August 2007. This allowed us to assemble large corpora in the target domain to be mainly used as training data for language modeling. We collected texts from the beginning of our data collection period to one month before the test set period, segmented these into sentences and randomized the order of the sentences to obviate copyright concerns. To lower the barrier of entry for newcomers to the field, we provided Moses, an open source toolkit for phrase-based statistical translation (Koehn et al., 2007). The performance of this baseline system is similar to the best submissions in last year’s shared task. Twelve participating groups used the Moses toolkit for the development of their system. We received submissions from 22 groups from 20 institutions, as listed in Table 1, a similar turnout to last year’s shared task. Of the 20 groups that participated with regular system submissions in last year’s shared task, 12 groups returned this year. A major hurdle for many was a DARPA/GALE evaluation that occurred at the same time as this shared task. We also evaluated 7 commercial rule-based MT systems, and Google’s online statistical machine translation system. We note that Google did not submit an entry itself. Its entry was created by the WMT09 organizers using Google’s online system.3 In personal correspondence, Franz Och clarified that the online system is different from Google’s research system in that it runs at faster speeds at the expense of somewhat lower translation quality. On the other hand, the training data used by Google is unconstrained, which means that it may have an advantage compared to the research systems evaluated in this workshop, since they were trained using only the provided materials. In total, we received 87 primary system submissions along with 42 secondary submissions. These were made available to participants in the system combination shared task. Based on feedback that we received on last year’s system combination task, we provided two additional resources to participants: In addition to soliciting system combination entries for each of the language pairs, we treated system combination as a way of doing multi-source translation, following Schroeder et al. (2009). For the multi-source system combination task, we provided all 46 primary system submissions from any language into English, along with an additional 32 secondary systems. Table 2 lists the six participants in the system combination task.
3 Human evaluation. As with past workshops, we placed greater emphasis on the human evaluation than on the automatic evaluation metric scores. It is our contention that automatic measures are an imperfect substitute for human assessment of translation quality. Therefore, we define the manual evaluation to be primary, and use the human judgments to validate automatic metrics. Manual evaluation is time consuming, and it requires a large effort to conduct it on the scale of our workshop. We distributed the workload across a number of people, including shared-task participants, interested volunteers, and a small number of paid annotators. More than 160 people participated in the manual evaluation, with 100 people putting in more than an hour’s worth of effort, and 30 putting in more than four hours. A collective total of 479 hours of labor was invested. We asked people to evaluate the systems’ output in two different ways: The total number of judgments collected for the different modes of annotation is given in Table 3. In all cases, the output of the various translation outputs were judged on equal footing; the output of system combinations was judged alongside that of the individual system, and the constrained and unconstrained systems were judged together. Ranking translations relative to each other is a reasonably intuitive task. We therefore kept the instructions simple: Rank translations from Best to Worst relative to the other choices (ties are allowed). In our the manual evaluation, annotators were shown at most five translations at a time. For most language pairs there were more than 5 systems submissions. We did not attempt to get a complete ordering over the systems, and instead relied on random selection and a reasonably large sample size to make the comparisons fair. Relative ranking is our official evaluation metric. Individual systems and system combinations are ranked based on how frequently they were judged to be better than or equal to any other system. The results of this are reported in Section 4. Appendix A provides detailed tables that contain pairwise comparisons between systems. We experimented with a new type of evaluation this year where we asked judges to edit the output of MT systems. We did not show judges the reference translation, which makes our edit-based evaluation different than the Human-targeted Translation Error Rate (HTER) measure used in the DARPA GALE program (NIST, 2008). Rather than asking people to make the minimum number of changes to the MT output in order capture the same meaning as the reference, we asked them to edit the translation to be as fluent as possible without seeing the reference. Our hope was that this would reflect people’s understanding of the output. The instructions that we gave our judges were the following: Each translated sentence was shown in isolation without any additional context. A screenshot is shown in Figure 2. Since we wanted to prevent judges from seeing the reference before editing the translations, we split the test set between the sentences used in the ranking task and the editing task (because they were being conducted concurrently). Moreover, annotators edited only a single system’s output for one source sentence to ensure that their understanding of it would not be influenced by another system’s output. Halfway through the manual evaluation period, we stopped collecting edited translations, and instead asked annotators to do the following: Indicate whether the edited translations represent fully fluent and meaningequivalent alternatives to the reference sentence. The reference is shown with context, the actual sentence is bold. In addition to edited translations, unedited items that were either marked as acceptable or as incomprehensible were also shown. Judges gave a simple yes/no indication to each item. A screenshot is shown in Figure 3. In order to measure intra-annotator agreement 10% of the items were repeated and evaluated twice by each judge. In order to measure interannotator agreement 40% of the items were randomly drawn from a common pool that was shared across all annotators so that we would have items that were judged by multiple annotators.
INTER-ANNOTATOR AGREEMENT. the two types of manual evaluation We measured pairwise agreement among annotators using the kappa coefficient (K) which is defined as where P(A) is the proportion of times that the annotators agree, and P(E) is the proportion of time that they would agree by chance. For inter-annotator agreement we calculated P(A) for the yes/no judgments by examining all items that were annotated by two or more annotators, and calculating the proportion of time they assigned identical scores to the same items. For the ranking tasks we calculated P(A) by examining all pairs of systems which had been judged by two or more judges, and calculated the proportion of time that they agreed that A > B, A = B, or A < B. Intra-annotator agreement was computed similarly, but we gathered items that were annotated on multiple occasions by a single annotator. Table 4 gives K values for inter-annotator and intra-annotator agreement. These give an indication of how often different judges agree, and how often single judges are consistent for repeated judgments, respectively. The interpretation of Kappa varies, but according to Landis and Koch (1977), 0 − .2 is slight, .2 − .4 is fair, .4 − .6 is moderate, .6 −.8 is substantial and the rest almost perfect. Based on these interpretations the agreement for yes/no judgments is moderate for inter-annotator agreement and substantial for intra-annotator agreement, but the inter-annotator agreement for sentence level ranking is only fair. We analyzed two possible strategies for improving inter-annotator agreement on the ranking task: First, we tried discarding initial judgments to give tors’ initial judgments, up to the first 50 items tors’ initial judgments, up to the first 50 items the lowest agreement, disregarding up to 40 annotators tators annotators a chance to learn to how to perform the task. Second, we tried disregarding annotators who have very low agreement with others, by throwing away judgments for the annotators with the lowest judgments. Figures 4 and 5 show how the K values improve for intra- and inter-annotator agreement under these two strategies, and what percentage of the judgments are retained as more annotators are removed, or as the initial learning period is made longer. It seems that the strategy of removing the worst annotators is the best in terms of improving inter-annotator K, while retaining most of the judgments. If we remove the 33 judges with the worst agreement, we increase the inter-annotator K from fair to moderate, and still retain 60% of the data. For the results presented in the rest of the paper, we retain all judgments.
4 Translation task results. We used the results of the manual evaluation to analyze the translation quality of the different systems that were submitted to the workshop. In our analysis, we aimed to address the following questions: Table 6 shows best individual systems. We define the best systems as those which had no other system that was statistically significantly better than them under the Sign Test at p G 0.1.4 Multiple systems are listed for many language pairs because it was not possible to draw a statistically significant difference between the systems. Commercial translation software (including Google, Systran, Morphologic, PCTrans, Eurotran XP, and anonymized RBMT providers) did well in each of the language pairs. Research systems that utilized 4In one case this definition meant that the system that was ranked the highest overall was not considered to be one of the best systems. For German-English translation RBMT5 was ranked highest overall, but was statistically significantly worse than RBMT2. only the provided data did as well as commercial vendors in half of the language pairs. The table also lists the best systems among those which used only the provided materials. To determine this decision we excluded unconstrained systems which employed significant external resources. Specifically, we ruled out all of the commercial systems, since Google has access to significantly greater data sources for its statistical system, and since the commercial RBMT systems utilize knowledge sources not available to other workshop participants. The remaining systems were research systems that employ statistical models. We were able to draw distinctions between half of these for each of the language pairs. There are some borderline cases, for instance LIMSI only used additional monolingual training resources, and LIUM/Systran used additional translation dictionaries as well as additional monolingual resources. Table 5 summarizes the performance of the system combination entries by listing the best ranked combinations, and by indicating whether they have a statistically significant difference with the best individual systems. In general, system combinations performed as well as the best individual systems, but not statistically significantly better than them. Moreover, it was hard to draw a distinction between the different system combination strategies themselves. There are a number of possibilities as to why we failed to find significant differences: • The number of judgments that we collected were not sufficient to find a difference. Although we collected several thousand judgments for each language pair, most pairs of systems were judged together fewer than 100 times. generally difficult to draw a statistically significant differences between the two groups, and between the combinations themselves. there is significant overlap in the strategies that they employ. Improved system combination warrants further investigation. We would suggest collecting additional judgments, and doing oracle experiments where the contributions of individual systems are weighted according to human judgments of their quality. Understandability Our hope is that judging the acceptability of edited output as discussed in Section 3 gives some indication of how often a system’s output was understandable. Figure 6 gives the percentage of times that each system’s edited output was judged to be acceptable (the percentage also factors in instances when judges were unable to improve the output because it was incomprehensible). The edited output of the best performing systems under this evaluation model were deemed acceptable around 50% of the time for French-English, English-French, EnglishSpanish, German-English, and English-German. For Spanish-English the edited output of the best system was acceptable around 40% of the time, for English-Czech it was 30% and for Czech-English and Hungarian-English it was around 20%. This style of manual evaluation is experimental and should not be taken to be authoritative. Some caveats about this measure: correlate with the more established method of ranking translations relative to each other for all the language pairs.5 Please also note that the number of corrected translations per system are very low for some language pairs, as low as 23 corrected sentences per system for the language pair English–French. C? indicates constrained condition, meaning only using the supplied training data and possibly standard monolingual linguistic tools (but no additional corpora). • indicates a win in the category, meaning that no other system is statistically significantly better at p-levelG0.1 in pairwise comparison. � indicates a constrained win, no other constrained system is statistically better. For all pairwise comparisons between systems, please check the appendix. Given these low numbers, the numbers presented in Figure 6 should not be read as comparisons between systems, but rather viewed as indicating the state of machine translation for different language pairs.
5 Shared evaluation task overview. In addition to allowing us to analyze the translation quality of different systems, the data gathered during the manual evaluation is useful for validating the automatic evaluation metrics. Last year, NIST began running a similar “Metrics for MAchine TRanslation” challenge (MetricsMATR), and presented their findings at a workshop at AMTA (Przybocki et al., 2008). In this year’s shared task we evaluated a number of different automatic metrics: for non-identical items. To find a maximum weight matching that matches each system item to at most one reference item, the items are then modeled as nodes in a bipartite graph. • wcd6p4er (Leusch and Ney, 2008)—a measure based on cder with word-based substitution costs. Leusch and Ney (2008) also submitted two contrastive metrics: bleusp4114, a modified version of BLEU-S (Lin and Och, 2004), with tuned n-gram weights, and bleusp, with constant weights. wcd6p4er is an error measure and bleusp is a quality score. metrics. The set of metrics used include Rouge, Meteor, measures of overlap between constituent parses, dependency parses, semantic roles, and discourse representations. The ULC metric had the strongest correlation with human judgments in WMT08 (CallisonBurch et al., 2008). • wpF and wpBleu (Popovic and Ney, 2009) These metrics are based on words and part of speech sequences. wpF is an n-gram based Fmeasure which takes into account both word n-grams and part of speech n-grams. wpBLEU is a combnination of the normal Blue score and a part of speech-based Bleu score. We measured the correlation of the automatic metrics with the human judgments of translation quality at the system-level using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient p. We converted the raw scores assigned to each system into ranks. We assigned a human ranking to the systems based on the percent of time that their translations were judged to be better than or equal to the translations of any other system in the manual evaluation. When there are no ties p can be calculated using the simplified equation: where di is the difference between the rank for systemi and n is the number of systems. The possible values of p range between 1 (where all systems are ranked in the same order) and −1 (where the systems are ranked in the reverse order). Thus an automatic evaluation metric with a higher absolute value for p is making predictions that are more similar to the human judgments than an automatic evaluation metric with a lower absolute p. Because the sentence-level judgments collected in the manual evaluation are relative judgments rather than absolute judgments, it is not possible for us to measure correlation at the sentencelevel in the same way that previous work has done (Kulesza and Shieber, 2004; Albrecht and Hwa, 2007a; Albrecht and Hwa, 2007b). Rather than calculating a correlation coefficient at the sentence-level we instead ascertained how consistent the automatic metrics were with the human judgments. The way that we calculated consistency was the following: for every pairwise comparison of two systems on a single sentence by a person, we counted the automatic metric as being consistent if the relative scores were the same (i.e. the metric assigned a higher score to the higher ranked system). We divided this by the total number of pairwise comparisons to get a percentage. Because the systems generally assign real numbers as scores, we excluded pairs that the human annotators ranked as ties.
6 Evaluation task results. Table 7 shows the correlation of automatic metrics when they rank systems that are translating into English. Note that TERp, TER and wcd6p4er are error metrics, so a negative correlation is better for them. The strength of correlation varied for the different language pairs. The automatic metrics were able to rank the French-English systems reasonably well with correlation coefficients in the range of .8 and .9. In comparison, metrics performed worse for Hungarian-English, where half of the systems had negative correlation. The ULC metric once again had strongest correlation with human judgments of translation quality. This was followed closely by MaxSim and RTE, with Meteor and TERp doing respectably well in 4th and 5th place. Notably, Bleu and its variants were the worst performing metrics in this translation direction. Table 8 shows correlation for metrics which operated on languages other than English. Most of the best performing metrics that operate on English do not work for foreign languages, because they perform some linguistic analysis or rely on a resource like WordNet. For translation into foreign languages TERp was the best system overall. The wpBleu and wpF metrics also did extremely well, performing the best in the language pairs that they were applied to. wpBleu and wpF were not applied to Czech because the authors of the metric did not have a Czech tagger. English-German proved to be the most problematic language pair to automatically evaluate, with all of the metrics having a negative correlation except wpBleu and TER. Table 9 gives detailed results for how well variations on a number of automatic metrics do for the task of ranking five English-Czech systems.6 These systems were submitted by Kos and Bojar (2009), and they investigate the effects of using Prague Dependency Treebank annotations during automatic evaluation. They linearizing the Czech trees and evaluated either the lemmatized forms of the Czech (lemma) read off the trees or the Tectogrammatical form which retained only lemmatized content words (tecto). The table also demonstrates SemPOS, Meteor, and GTM perform better on Czech than many other metrics. Tables 10 and 11 show the percent of times that the metrics’ scores were consistent with human rankings of every pair of translated sentences.7 Since we eliminated sentence pairs that were judged to be equal, the random baseline for this task is 50%. Many metrics failed to reach the baseline (including most metrics in the out-of-English direction). This indicates that sentence-level evaluation of machine translation quality is very difficult. RTE and ULC again do the best overall for the intoEnglish direction. They are followed closely by wpF and wcd6p4er, which considerably improve their performance over their system-level correlations. We tried a variant on measuring sentence-level consistency. Instead of using the scores assigned to each individual sentence, we used the systemlevel score and applied it to every sentence that was produced by that system. These can be thought of as a metric’s prior expectation about how a system should preform, based on their performance on the whole data set. Tables 12 and 13 show that using the system-level scores in place of the sentence-level scores results in considerably higher consistency with human judgments. This suggests an interesting line of research for improving sentence-level predictions by using the performance on a larger data set as a prior.
7 Summary. As in previous editions of this workshop we carried out an extensive manual and automatic evaluation of machine translation performance for translating from European languages into English, rics when their system-level ranks are treated as sentence-level scores. Oracle shows the consistency of using the system-level human ranks that are given in Table 6. rics when their system-level ranks are treated as sentence-level scores. Oracle shows the consistency of using the system-level human ranks that are given in Table 6. and vice versa. The number of participants remained stable compared to last year’s WMT workshop, with 22 groups from 20 institutions participating in WMT09. This year’s evaluation also included 7 commercial rule-based MT systems and Google’s online statistical machine translation system. Compared to previous years, we have simplified the evaluation conditions by removing the indomain vs. out-of-domain distinction focusing on news translations only. The main reason for this was eliminating the advantage statistical systems have with respect to test data that are from the same domain as the training data. Analogously to previous years, the main focus of comparing the quality of different approaches is on manual evaluation. Here, also, we reduced the number of dimensions with respect to which the different systems are compared, with sentencelevel ranking as the primary type of manual evaluation. In addition to the direct quality judgments we also evaluated translation quality by having people edit the output of systems and have assessors judge the correctness of the edited output. The degree to which users were able to edit the translations (without having access to the source sentence or reference translation) served as a measure of the overall comprehensibility of the translation. Although the inter-annotator agreement in the sentence-ranking evaluation is only fair (as measured by the Kappa score), agreement can be improved by removing the first (up to 50) judgments of each assessor, focusing on the judgments that were made once the assessors are more familiar with the task. Inter-annotator agreement with respect to correctness judgments of the edited translations were higher (moderate), which is probably due to the simplified evaluation criterion (binary judgments versus rankings). Inter-annotator agreement for both conditions can be increased further by removing the judges with the worst agreement. Intra-annotator agreement on the other hand was considerably higher ranging between moderate and substantial. In addition to the manual evaluation criteria we applied a large number of automated metrics to see how they correlate with the human judgments. There is considerably variation between the different metrics and the language pairs under consideration. As in WMT08, the ULC metric had the highest overall correlation with human judgments when translating into English, with MaxSim and RTE following closely behind. TERp and wpBleu were best when translating into other languages. Automatically predicting human judgments at the sentence-level proved to be quite challenging with many of the systems performing around chance. We performed an analysis that showed that if metrics’ system-level scores are used in place of their scores for individual sentences, that they do quite a lot better. This suggests that prior probabilities ought to be integrated into sentencelevel scoring. All data sets generated by this workshop, including the human judgments, system translations and automatic scores, are publicly available for other researchers to analyze.8
Acknowledgments. This work was supported in parts by the EuroMatrix project funded by the European Commission (6th Framework Programme), the GALE program of the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Contract No. HR0011-06-C-0022, and the US National Science Foundation under grant IIS-0713448. We are grateful to Holger Schwenk and Preslav Nakov for pointing out the potential bias in our method for ranking systems when self-judgments are excluded. We analyzed the results and found that this did not hold. We would like to thank Maja Popovic for sharing thoughts about how to improve the manual evaluation. Thanks to Cam Fordyce for helping out with the manual evaluation again this year. An extremely big thanks to Sebastian Pado for helping us work through the logic of segment-level scoring of automatic evaluation metric.