PP — 31.5 In all experiments, we use the following three error criteria: • WER (word error rate): The WER is computed as the minimum number of substitution, insertion and deletion operations that have to be performed to convert the generated string into the target string. This performance criterion is widely used in speech recognition. • PER (position-independent word error rate): A shortcoming of the WER is the fact that it requires a perfect word order. This is 26 2: for Text and Speech Input: error rate (WER), positionindependent word error rate (PER) and subjective sentence error rate (SSER) with/without preprocessing (147 sentences = 1 968 words of the Verbmobil task). Input Preproc. WER[%] PER[Vo] SSER[%] Single-Word Based Approach Text No 53.4 38.3 35.7 Yes 56.0 41.2 35.3 Speech No 67.8 50.1 54.8 Yes 67.8 51.4 52.7 Alignnient Templates Text No 49.5 35.3 31.5 Yes 48.3 35.1 27.2 Speech No 63.5 45.6 52.4 Yes 62.8 45.6 50.3 particularly a problem for the Verbmobil task, where the word order of the German- English sentence pair can be quite different. As a result, the word order of the automatically generated target sentence can be different from that of the target sentence, but nevertheless acceptable so that the WER measure alone could be misleading. In order to overcome this problem, we introduce as additional measure the positionindependent word error rate (PER). This measure compares the words in the two senthe word order into account. Words that have no matching counterparts are counted as substitution errors. Depending on whether the translated sentence is longer or shorter than the target translation, the remaining words result in either insertion or deletion errors in addition to substitution errors. The PER is guaranteed to be less than or equal to the WER. • SSER (subjective sentence error rate): For a more detailed analysis, subjective judgments by test persons are necessary. Each translated sentence was judged by a human examiner according to an error scale from 0.0 to 1.0. A score of 0.0 means that the translation is semantically and syntactically correct, a score of 0.5 means that a sentence is semantically correct but syntactically wrong and a score of 1.0 means that the sentence is semantically wrong. The human examiner was offered the translated sentences of the two approaches at the same As a result we expect a better possibility of reproduction. The results of the translation experiments using the single-word based approach and the alignment template approach on text input and on speech input are summarized in Table 2. The results are shown with and without the use of domain-specific preprocessing. The alignment template approach produces better translation results than the single-word based approach. From this we draw the conclusion that it is important to model word groups in source and target language. Considering the recognition word error rate of 31% the degradation of about 20% by speech input can be expected. The average translation time on an Alpha workstation for a single sentence is about one second for the alignment template appreach and 30 seconds for the single-word based search procedure. Within the Verbmobil project other translation modules based on rule-based, examplebased and dialogue-act-based translation are used. We are not able to present results with these methods using our test corpus. But in the current Verbmobil prototype the preliminary evaluations show that the statistical methods produce comparable or better results than other systems. An advantage of the systhat it is robust and always produces a translation result even if the input of the speech recognizer is quite incorrect. 5 Summary We have described two approaches to perform statistical machine translation which extend the baseline alignment models. The single-word 27 based approach allows for the the possibility of one-to-many alignments. The alignment template approach uses two different alignment levels: a phrase level alignment between phrases and a word level alignment between single words. As a result the context of words has a greater influence and the changes in word order from source to target language can be learned explicitly. An advantage of both methods is that they learn fully automatically by using a bilingual training corpus and are capable of achieving better translation results on a limited-domain task than other example-based or rule-based translation systems. Acknowledgment This work has been partially supported as part of the Verbmobil project (contract number 01 IV 701 T4) by the German Federal Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Technology and as part of the EuTrans project by the by the European Community (ESPRIT project number 30268).