1 Introduction. Status Messages posted on Social Media websites such as Facebook and Twitter present a new and challenging style of text for language technology due to their noisy and informal nature. Like SMS (Kobus et al., 2008), tweets are particularly terse and difficult (See Table 1). Yet tweets provide a unique compilation of information that is more upto-date and inclusive than news articles, due to the low-barrier to tweeting, and the proliferation of mobile devices.1 The corpus of tweets already exceeds the size of the Library of Congress (Hachman, 2011) and is growing far more rapidly. Due to the volume of tweets, it is natural to consider named-entity recognition, information extraction, and text mining over tweets. Not surprisingly, the performance of “off the shelf” NLP tools, which were trained on news corpora, is weak on tweet corpora. In response, we report on a re-trained “NLP pipeline” that leverages previously-tagged out-ofdomain text, 2 tagged tweets, and unlabeled tweets to achieve more effective part-of-speech tagging, chunking, and named-entity recognition. 1 The Hobbit has FINALLY started filming! I cannot wait! 2 Yess! Yess! Its official Nintendo announced today that they Will release the Nintendo 3DS in north America march 27 for $250 3 Government confirms blast n nuclear plants n japan...don’t knw wht s gona happen nw... We find that classifying named entities in tweets is a difficult task for two reasons. First, tweets contain a plethora of distinctive named entity types (Companies, Products, Bands, Movies, and more). Almost all these types (except for People and Locations) are relatively infrequent, so even a large sample of manually annotated tweets will contain few training examples. Secondly, due to Twitter’s 140 character limit, tweets often lack sufficient context to determine an entity’s type without the aid of background knowledge. To address these issues we propose a distantly supervised approach which applies LabeledLDA (Ramage et al., 2009) to leverage large amounts of unlabeled data in addition to large dictionaries of entities gathered from Freebase, and combines information about an entity’s context across its mentions. We make the following contributions: LabeledLDA is applied, utilizing constraints based on an open-domain database (Freebase) as a source of supervision. This approach increases F1 score by 25% relative to co-training (Blum and Mitchell, 1998; Yarowsky, 1995) on the task of classifying named entities in Tweets. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We successively build the NLP pipeline for Twitter feeds in Sections 2 and 3. We first present our approaches to shallow syntax – part of speech tagging (§2.1), and shallow parsing (§2.2). §2.3 describes a novel classifier that predicts the informativeness of capitalization in a tweet. All tools in §2 are used as features for named entity segmentation in §3.1. Next, we present our algorithms and evaluation for entity classification (§3.2). We describe related work in §4 and conclude in §5.
2 Shallow Syntax in Tweets. We first study two fundamental NLP tasks – POS tagging and noun-phrase chunking. We also discuss a novel capitalization classifier in §2.3. The outputs of all these classifiers are used in feature generation for named entity recognition in the next section. For all experiments in this section we use a dataset of 800 randomly sampled tweets. All results (Tables 2, 4 and 5) represent 4-fold cross-validation experiments on the respective tasks.3 Part of speech tagging is applicable to a wide range of NLP tasks including named entity segmentation and information extraction. Prior experiments have suggested that POS tagging has a very strong baseline: assign each word to its most frequent tag and assign each Out of Vocabulary (OOV) word the most common POS tag. This baseline obtained a 0.9 accuracy on the Brown corpus (Charniak et al., 1993). However, the application of a similar baseline on tweets (see Table 2) obtains a much weaker 0.76, exposing the challenging nature of Twitter data. A key reason for this drop in accuracy is that Twitter contains far more OOV words than grammatical text. Many of these OOV words come from spelling variation, e.g., the use of the word “n” for “in” in Table 1 example 3. Although NNP is the most frequent tag for OOV words, only about 1/3 are NNPs. The performance of off-the-shelf news-trained POS taggers also suffers on Twitter data. The stateof-the-art Stanford POS tagger (Toutanova et al., 2003) improves on the baseline, obtaining an accuracy of 0.8. This performance is impressive given that its training data, the Penn Treebank WSJ (PTB), is so different in style from Twitter, however it is a huge drop from the 97% accuracy reported on the PTB. There are several reasons for this drop in performance. Table 3 lists common errors made by the Stanford tagger. First, due to unreliable capitalization, common nouns are often misclassified as proper nouns, and vice versa. Also, interjections and verbs are frequently misclassified as nouns. In addition to differences in vocabulary, the grammar of tweets is quite different from edited news text. For instance, tweets often start with a verb (where the subject ‘I’ is implied), as in: “watchng american dad.” To overcome these differences in style and vocabulary, we manually annotated a set of 800 tweets (16K tokens) with tags from the Penn TreeBank tag set for use as in-domain training data for our POS tagging system, T-POS.4 We add new tags for the Twitter specific phenomena: retweets, @usernames, #hashtags, and urls. Note that words in these categories can be tagged with 100% accuracy using simple regular expressions. To ensure fair comparison in Table 2, we include a postprocessing step which tags these words appropriately for all systems. To help address the issue of OOV words and lexical variations, we perform clustering to group together words which are distributionally similar (Brown et al., 1992; Turian et al., 2010). In particular, we perform hierarchical clustering using Jcluster (Goodman, 2001) on 52 million tweets; each word is uniquely represented by a bit string based on the path from the root of the resulting hierarchy to the word’s leaf. We use the Brown clusters resulting from prefixes of 4, 8, and 12 bits. These clusters are often effective in capturing lexical variations, for example, following are lexical variations on the word “tomorrow” from one cluster after filtering out other words (most of which refer to days): T-POS uses Conditional Random Fields5 (Lafferty et al., 2001), both because of their ability to model strong dependencies between adjacent POS tags, and also to make use of highly correlated features (for example a word’s identity in addition to prefixes and suffixes). Besides employing the Brown clusters computed above, we use a fairly standard set of features that include POS dictionaries, spelling and contextual features. On a 4-fold cross validation over 800 tweets, T-POS outperforms the Stanford tagger, obtaining a 26% reduction in error. In addition we include 40K tokens of annotated IRC chat data (Forsythand and Martell, 2007), which is similar in style. Like Twitter, IRC data contains many misspelled/abbreviated words, and also more pronouns, and interjections, but fewer determiners than news. Finally, we also leverage 50K POS-labeled tokens from the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1994). Overall T-POS trained on 102K tokens (12K from Twitter, 40K from IRC and 50K from PTB) results in a 41% error reduction over the Stanford tagger, obtaining an accuracy of 0.883. Table 3 lists gains on some of the most common error types, for example, T-POS dramatically reduces error on interjections and verbs that are incorrectly classified as nouns by the Stanford tagger. Shallow parsing, or chunking is the task of identifying non-recursive phrases, such as noun phrases, verb phrases, and prepositional phrases in text. Accurate shallow parsing of tweets could benefit several applications such as Information Extraction and Named Entity Recognition. Off the shelf shallow parsers perform noticeably worse on tweets, motivating us again to annotate indomain training data. We annotate the same set of 800 tweets mentioned previously with tags from the CoNLL shared task (Tjong Kim Sang and Buchholz, 2000). We use the set of shallow parsing features described by Sha and Pereira (2003), in addition to the Brown clusters mentioned above. Part-of-speech tag features are extracted based on cross-validation output predicted by T-POS. For inference and learning, again we use Conditional Random Fields. We utilize 16K tokens of in-domain training data (using cross validation), in addition to 210K tokens of newswire text from the CoNLL dataset. Table 4 reports T-CHUNK’s performance at shallow parsing of tweets. We compare against the offthe shelf OpenNLP chunker6, obtaining a 22% reduction in error. A key orthographic feature for recognizing named entities is capitalization (Florian, 2002; Downey et al., 2007). Unfortunately in tweets, capitalization is much less reliable than in edited texts. In addition, there is a wide variety in the styles of capitalization. In some tweets capitalization is informative, whereas in other cases, non-entity words are capitalized simply for emphasis. Some tweets contain all lowercase words (8%), whereas others are in ALL CAPS (0.6%). To address this issue, it is helpful to incorporate information based on the entire content of the message to determine whether or not its capitalization is informative. To this end, we build a capitalization classifier, T-CAP, which predicts whether or not a tweet is informatively capitalized. Its output is used as a feature for Named Entity Recognition. We manually labeled our 800 tweet corpus as having either “informative” or “uninformative” capitalization. The criteria we use for labeling is as follows: if a tweet contains any non-entity words which are capitalized, but do not begin a sentence, or it contains any entities which are not capitalized, then its capitalization is “uninformative”, otherwise it is “informative”. For learning , we use Support Vector Machines.7 The features used include: the fraction of words in the tweet which are capitalized, the fraction which appear in a dictionary of frequently lowercase/capitalized words but are not lowercase/capitalized in the tweet, the number of times the word ‘I’ appears lowercase and whether or not the first word in the tweet is capitalized. Results comparing against the majority baseline, which predicts capitalization is always informative, are shown in Table 5. Additionally, in §3 we show that features based on our capitalization classifier improve performance at named entity segmentation.
3 Named Entity Recognition. We now discuss our approach to named entity recognition on Twitter data. As with POS tagging and shallow parsing, off the shelf named-entity recognizers perform poorly on tweets. For example, applying the Stanford Named Entity Recognizer to one of the examples from Table 1 results in the following output: [Nintendo]LOC announced today that they Will release the [Nintendo]ORG 3DS in north [America]LOC march 27 for $250 The OOV word ‘Yess’ is mistaken as a named entity. In addition, although the first occurrence of ‘Nintendo’ is correctly segmented, it is misclassified, whereas the second occurrence is improperly segmented – it should be the product “Nintendo 3DS”. Finally “north America” should be segmented as a LOCATION, rather than just ‘America’. In general, news-trained Named Entity Recognizers seem to rely heavily on capitalization, which we know to be unreliable in tweets. Following Collins and Singer (1999), Downey et al. (2007) and Elsner et al. (2009), we treat classification and segmentation of named entities as separate tasks. This allows us to more easily apply techniques better suited towards each task. For example, we are able to use discriminative methods for named entity segmentation and distantly supervised approaches for classification. While it might be beneficial to jointly model segmentation and (distantly supervised) classification using a joint sequence labeling and topic model similar to that proposed by Sauper et al. (2010), we leave this for potential future work. Because most words found in tweets are not part of an entity, we need a larger annotated dataset to effectively learn a model of named entities. We therefore use a randomly sampled set of 2,400 tweets for NER. All experiments (Tables 6, 8-10) report results using 4-fold cross validation. they can refer to people or companies), we believe they could be more easily classified using features of their associated user’s profile than contextual features of the text. T-SEG models Named Entity Segmentation as a sequence-labeling task using IOB encoding for representing segmentations (each word either begins, is inside, or is outside of a named entity), and uses Conditional Random Fields for learning and inference. Again we include orthographic, contextual and dictionary features; our dictionaries included a set of type lists gathered from Freebase. In addition, we use the Brown clusters and outputs of T-POS, T-CHUNK and T-CAP in generating features. We report results at segmenting named entities in Table 6. Compared with the state-of-the-art newstrained Stanford Named Entity Recognizer (Finkel et al., 2005), T-SEG obtains a 52% increase in F1 score. Because capitalization in Twitter is less informative than news, in-domain data is needed to train models which rely less heavily on capitalization, and also are able to utilize features provided by T-CAP. We exhaustively annotated our set of 2,400 tweets (34K tokens) with named entities.8 A convention on Twitter is to refer to other users using the @ symbol followed by their unique username. We deliberately choose not to annotate @usernames as entities in our data set because they are both unambiguous, and trivial to identify with 100% accuracy using a simple regular expression, and would only serve to inflate our performance statistics. While there is ambiguity as to the type of @usernames (for example, Because Twitter contains many distinctive, and infrequent entity types, gathering sufficient training data for named entity classification is a difficult task. In any random sample of tweets, many types will only occur a few times. Moreover, due to their terse nature, individual tweets often do not contain enough context to determine the type of the entities they contain. For example, consider following tweet: KKTNY in 45min without any prior knowledge, there is not enough context to determine what type of entity “KKTNY” refers to, however by exploiting redundancy in the data (Downey et al., 2010), we can determine it is likely a reference to a television show since it often co-occurs with words such as watching and premieres in other contexts.9 In order to handle the problem of many infrequent types, we leverage large lists of entities and their types gathered from an open-domain ontology (Freebase) as a source of distant supervision, allowing use of large amounts of unlabeled data in learning. Freebase Baseline: Although Freebase has very broad coverage, simply looking up entities and their types is inadequate for classifying named entities in context (0.38 F-score, §3.2.1). For example, according to Freebase, the mention ‘China’ could refer to a country, a band, a person, or a film. This problem is very common: 35% of the entities in our data appear in more than one of our (mutually exclusive) Freebase dictionaries. Additionally, 30% of entities mentioned on Twitter do not appear in any Freebase dictionary, as they are either too new (for example a newly released videogame), or are misspelled or abbreviated (for example ‘mbp’ is often used to refer to the “mac book pro”). Distant Supervision with Topic Models: To model unlabeled entities and their possible types, we apply LabeledLDA (Ramage et al., 2009), constraining each entity’s distribution over topics based on its set of possible types according to Freebase. In contrast to previous weakly supervised approaches to Named Entity Classification, for example the CoTraining and Naive Bayes (EM) models of Collins and Singer (1999), LabeledLDA models each entity string as a mixture of types rather than using a single hidden variable to represent the type of each mention. This allows information about an entity’s distribution over types to be shared across mentions, naturally handling ambiguous entity strings whose mentions could refer to different types. Each entity string in our data is associated with a bag of words found within a context window around all of its mentions, and also within the entity itself. As in standard LDA (Blei et al., 2003), each bag of words is associated with a distribution over topics, Multinomial(Oe), and each topic is associated with a distribution over words, Multinomial(ot). In addition, there is a one-to-one mapping between topics and Freebase type dictionaries. These dictionaries constrain Oe, the distribution over topics for each entity string, based on its set of possible types, FB[e]. For example, OAmazon could correspond to a distribution over two types: COMPANY, and LOCATION, whereas OApple might represent a distribution over COMPANY, and FOOD. For entities which aren’t found in any of the Freebase dictionaries, we leave their topic distributions Oe unconstrained. Note that in absence of any constraints LabeledLDA reduces to standard LDA, and a fully unsupervised setting similar to that presented by Elsner et. al. (2009). In detail, the generative process that models our data for Named Entity Classification is as follows: Generate ze,i from Mult(Oe). Generate the word we,i from Mult(o,;e,i). To infer values for the hidden variables, we apply Collapsed Gibbs sampling (Griffiths and Steyvers, 2004), where parameters are integrated out, and the ze,is are sampled directly. In making predictions, we found it beneficial to consider Otrain e as a prior distribution over types for entities which were encountered during training. In practice this sharing of information across contexts is very beneficial as there is often insufficient evidence in an isolated tweet to determine an entity’s type. For entities which weren’t encountered during training, we instead use a prior based on the distribution of types across all entities. One approach to classifying entities in context is to assume that Otrain e is fixed, and that all of the words inside the entity mention and context, w, are drawn based on a single topic, z, that is they are all drawn from Multinomial(o,;). We can then compute the posterior distribution over types in closed form with a simple application of Bayes rule: During development, however, we found that rather than making these assumptions, using Gibbs Sampling to estimate the posterior distribution over types performs slightly better. In order to make predictions, for each entity we use an informative Dirichlet prior based on Otrain e and perform 100 iterations of Gibbs Sampling holding the hidden topic variables in the training data fixed (Yao et al., 2009). Fewer iterations are needed than in training since the typeword distributions, β have already been inferred. To evaluate T-CLASS’s ability to classify entity mentions in context, we annotated the 2,400 tweets with 10 types which are both popular on Twitter, and have good coverage in Freebase: PERSON, GEO-LOCATION, COMPANY, PRODUCT, FACILITY, TV-SHOW, MOVIE, SPORTSTEAM, BAND, and OTHER. Note that these type annotations are only used for evaluation purposes, and not used during training T-CLASS, which relies only on distant supervision. In some cases, we combine multiple Freebase types to create a dictionary of entities representing a single type (for example the COMPANY dictionary contains Freebase types /business/consumer company and /business/brand). Because our approach does not rely on any manually labeled examples, it is straightforward to extend it for a different sets of types based on the needs of downstream applications. Training: To gather unlabeled data for inference, we run T-SEG, our entity segmenter (from §3.1), on 60M tweets, and keep the entities which appear 100 or more times. This results in a set of 23,651 distinct entity strings. For each entity string, we collect words occurring in a context window of 3 words from all mentions in our data, and use a vocabulary of the 100K most frequent words. We run Gibbs sampling for 1,000 iterations, using the last sample to estimate entity-type distributions Oe, in addition to type-word distributions βt. Table 7 displays the 20 entities (not found in Freebase) whose posterior distribution Oe assigns highest probability to selected types. Results: Table 8 presents the classification results of T-CLASS compared against a majority baseline which simply picks the most frequent class (PERSON), in addition to the Freebase baseline, which only makes predictions if an entity appears in exactly one dictionary (i.e., appears unambiguous). T-CLASS also outperforms a simple supervised baseline which applies a MaxEnt classifier using 4-fold cross validation over the 1,450 entities which were annotated for testing. Additionally we compare against the co-training algorithm of Collins and Singer (1999) which also leverages unlabeled data and uses our Freebase type lists; for seed rules we use the “unambiguous” Freebase entities. Our results demonstrate that T-CLASS outperforms the baselines and achieves a 25% increase in F1 score over co-training. Tables 9 and 10 present a breakdown of F1 scores by type, both collapsing types into the standard classes used in the MUC competitions (PERSON, LOCATION, ORGANIZATION), and using the 10 popular Twitter types described earlier. Entity Strings vs. Entity Mentions: DL-Cotrain and LabeledLDA use two different representations for the unlabeled data during learning. LabeledLDA groups together words across all mentions of an entity string, and infers a distribution over its possible types, whereas DL-Cotrain considers the entity mentions separately as unlabeled examples and predicts a type independently for each. In order to ensure that the difference in performance between LabeledLDA and DL-Cotrain is not simply due to this difference in representation, we compare both DL-Cotrain and LabeledLDA using both unlabeled datasets (grouping words by all mentions vs. keeping mentions separate) in Table 11. As expected, DL-Cotrain performs poorly when the unlabeled examples group mentions; this makes sense, since CoTraining uses a discriminative learning algorithm, so when trained on entities and tested on individual mentions, the performance decreases. Additionally, LabeledLDA’s performance is poorer when considering mentions as “documents”. This is likely due to the fact that there isn’t enough context to effectively learn topics when the “documents” are very short (typically fewer than 10 words). End to End System: Finally we present the end to end performance on segmentation and classification (T-NER) in Table 12. We observe that T-NER again outperforms co-training. Moreover, comparing against the Stanford Named Entity Recognizer on the 3 MUC types, T-NER doubles FI score.
4 Related Work. There has been relatively little previous work on building NLP tools for Twitter or similar text styles. Locke and Martin (2009) train a classifier to recognize named entities based on annotated Twitter data, handling the types PERSON, LOCATION, and ORGANIZATION. Developed in parallel to our work, Liu et al. (2011) investigate NER on the same 3 types, in addition to PRODUCTs and present a semisupervised approach using k-nearest neighbor. Also ing topic models (e.g. LabeledLDA) for classifying developed in parallel, Gimpell et al. (2011) build a named entities has a similar effect, in that informaPOS tagger for tweets using 20 coarse-grained tags. tion about an entity’s distribution of possible types Benson et. al. (2011) present a system which ex- is shared across its mentions. tracts artists and venues associated with musical per- 5 Conclusions formances. Recent work (Han and Baldwin, 2011; We have demonstrated that existing tools for POS Gouws et al., 2011) has proposed lexical normaliza- tagging, Chunking and Named Entity Recognition tion of tweets which may be useful as a preprocess- perform quite poorly when applied to Tweets. To ing step for the upstream tasks like POS tagging and address this challenge we have annotated tweets and NER. In addition Finin et. al. (2010) investigate built tools trained on unlabeled, in-domain and outthe use of Amazon’s Mechanical Turk for annotat- of-domain data, showing substantial improvement ing Named Entities in Twitter, Minkov et. al. (2005) over their state-of-the art news-trained counterparts, investigate person name recognizers in email, and for example, T-POS outperforms the Stanford POS Singh et. al. (2010) apply a minimally supervised Tagger, reducing error by 41%. Additionally we approach to extracting entities from text advertise- have shown the benefits of features generated from ments. T-POS and T-CHUNK in segmenting Named Entities. In contrast to previous work, we have demon- We identified named entity classification as a parstrated the utility of features based on Twitter- ticularly challenging task on Twitter. Due to their specific POS taggers and Shallow Parsers in seg- terse nature, tweets often lack enough context to menting Named Entities. In addition we take a dis- identify the types of the entities they contain. In adtantly supervised approach to Named Entity Classi- dition, a plethora of distinctive named entity types fication which exploits large dictionaries of entities are present, necessitating large amounts of training gathered from Freebase, requires no manually anno- data. To address both these issues we have presented tated data, and as a result is able to handle a larger and evaluated a distantly supervised approach based number of types than previous work. Although we on LabeledLDA, which obtains a 25% increase in F1 found manually annotated data to be very beneficial score over the co-training approach to Named Enfor named entity segmentation, we were motivated tity Classification suggested by Collins and Singer to explore approaches that don’t rely on manual la- (1999) when applied to Twitter. bels for classification due to Twitter’s wide range of Our POS tagger, Chunker Named Entity Recnamed entity types. Additionally, unlike previous ognizer are available for use by the research work on NER in informal text, our approach allows community: http://github.com/aritter/ the sharing of information across an entity’s men- twitter_nlp tions which is quite beneficial due to Twitter’s terse Acknowledgments nature. We would like to thank Stephen Soderland, Dan Previous work on Semantic Bootstrapping has Weld and Luke Zettlemoyer, in addition to the taken a weakly-supervised approach to classifying anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on a named entities based on large amounts of unla- previous draft. This research was supported in part beled text (Etzioni et al., 2005; Carlson et al., 2010; by NSF grant IIS-0803481, ONR grant N00014-11Kozareva and Hovy, 2010; Talukdar and Pereira, 1-0294, Navy STTR contract N00014-10-M-0304, a 2010; McIntosh, 2010). In contrast, rather than National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate predicting which classes an entity belongs to (e.g. (NDSEG) Fellowship 32 CFR 168a and carried out a multi-label classification task), LabeledLDA esti- at the University of Washington’s Turing Center. mates a distribution over its types, which is then useful as a prior when classifying mentions in context. In addition there has been been work on SkipChain CRFs (Sutton, 2004; Finkel et al., 2005) which enforce consistency when classifying multiple occurrences of an entity within a document. Us1532