128 24% 161 29% 47 9% 148 27% 32 6% 17 3% 11 2% 6. Discussion the rules for Fidditch are written as deterministic pattern-action rules of the same sort as the rules in the parsing grammar, their operation is in a sense isolable. The patterns of the self-correction rules are checked first, before any of the grammar rule patterns are checked, at each step in the parse. Despite this independence in terms of rule ordering, the operation of the self-corr,:ction component is closely tied to the grammar of the parser; for it is the parsing grammar that specifies what sort of constituents count as the same for copying. example, if the grammar did not treat a noun phrase when it is subject of a sentence, the self-correction rules could not properly resolve a sentence like People-a people from Kennsington the editing rules would never recognize that the same sort of element. (Note (13) treated as a Restart because lexical trigger is not present.) Thus, the observed pattern of self-correction introduces empirical constraints on the set of features that are available for syntactic rules. The self-correction rules impose constraints not only on what linguistic elements must count as the same, but also on what must count as different. For example, in sentence be recognized as different sorts of elements in the grammar for the AUX node to be correctly the grammar assigned the words exactly the same part of speech, then the Category C;.7y Editor necessarily apply, incorrectly expunging (14) Kid could-be a brain in school. It appears therefore that the pattern of self-corrections that occur represents a potentially rich source of evidence about the nature of syntactic categories. the patterns of self-correction count as about the nature of categories for the linguist, then this data must be equally available to the language learner. This would suggest that, far from being an impediment to language learning, non-fluencies may in fact facilitate language acquisition by highlighting equivalent classes. expunction of edit signal only surface copy category copy stack copy restart failures remaining unclear and ungrammatical 127 This raises the general question of how children can acquire a language in the face of unrestrained non-fluency. How can a language learner sort out the grammatical from the ungrammatical strings? (The non-fluencies of speech are of course but one aspect of the degeneracy of input that makes language acquisition a puzzle.) The self-correction system I have described suggests that many non-fluent strings can be resolved with little detailed linguistic knowledge. As Table 1 shows, about a quarter of the editing signals result in expunction of only non-linguistic material. This requires only an ability to distinguish linguistic from nonlinguistic stuff, and it introduces the idea that edit signals signal an expunction site. Almost a third are resolved by the Surface Copying rule, which can be viewed simply as an instance of the general non-linguistic rule that multiple instances of the same thing count as a single instance. The category copying rules are generalizations of simple copying, applied to a knowledge of linguistic categories. Making the transition from surface copies to category copies is aided by the fact that there is considerable overlap in coverage, defining a path of expanding generalization. Thus at the earliest stages of learning, only the simplest, non-linguistic self-correction rules would come into play, and gradually the more syntactically integrated would be acquired. Contrast this self-correction system to an approach that handles non-fluencies by some general problem solving routines, for example Granger (1982), who proposes reasoning from what a speaker might be expected to say. Besides the obvious inefficiencies of general problem solving approaches, it is worth giving special emphasis to the problem with learnability. A general problem solving approach depends crucially on evaluating the likelihood of possible deviations from the norms. But a language learner has by definition only partial and possibly incorrect knowledge of the syntax, and is therefore unable to consistently identify deviations from the grammatical system. With the editing system I describe, the learner need not have the ability to recognize deviations from grammatical norms, but merely the non-linguistic ability to recognize copies of the same thing. far, I have considered the selfcorrection component from the standpoint of parsing. However, it is clear that the origins are in the process of generation. The mechanism for editing self-corrections that I have proposed has as its essential operation expunging one two identical is unable to expunge a sequence of two elements. (The Surface Copy Editor might be viewed as a counterexample to this claim, but see below.) Consider expunction now from the standpoint of the generator. Suppose self-correction bears a one-to-one relationship to a possible action of the generator (initiated by some monitoring component) which could be called ABANDON CONSTRUCT X. And suppose that this action can be initiated at any time up until CONSTRUCT X is completed, when a signal is returned that the construction is complete. Further suppose that ABANDON CONSTRUCT X causes an editing signal. When the speaker decides in the middle of some linguistic element to abandon it and start again, an editing signal is produced. If this is an appropriate model, then the elements which are self-corrected should be exactly those elements that xist at some stage in the generation process. Thus, we should be able to find evidence for the units involved in generation by looking at the data of self-correction. And indeed, such evidence should be available to the language learner as well. Summary I have described the nature of self-corrected speech (which is a major source of spoken non-fluencies) and how it can be resolved by simple editing rules within the context of a deterministic parser. Two features are essential to the self-correction system: 1) every self-correction site (whether it results in the expunction of words or not) is marked by a phonetically identifiable signal placed at the right edge of the potential expunction site; and 2) the expunged part is the left-hand member of a pair of copies, one on each side of the editing signal. The copies may be of three types: 1) identical surface strings, which are edited by a matching rule that applies before syntactic analysis begins; 2) complete constituents, when two constituents of the same type appear in the parser's buffer; or 3) incomplete constituents, when the parser finds itself trying to complete a constituent of the same type as a constituent it has just completed. Whenever two such copies appear in such a configuration, and the first one ends with an editing signal, the first is expunged from further analysis. This editing system has been implemented as part of a deterministic parser, and tested on a wide range of sentences from transcribed speech. Further study of the self-correction system promises to provide insights into the units of production and the nature of linguistic categories.