1 Introduction. This paper presents empirical support for the assumption long held by computational linguists, that intonation can provide valuable cues for discourse processing. The relationship between intonational variation and discourse structure has been explored in a new corpus of direction-giving monologues. We examine the effects of speaking style (read versus spontaneous) and of discourse segmentation method (text-alone versus text-and-speech) on the nature of this relationship. We also compare the acousticprosodic features of initial, medial, and final utterances in a discourse segment. A better understanding of the role of intonation in conveying discourse structure will enable improvements in the naturalness of intonational variation in text-to-speech systems as well as in algorithms for recognizing discourse structure in speech-understanding systems.
2 Theoretical and Empirical Foundations. It has long been assumed in computational linguistics that discourse structure plays an important role in Natural Language Understanding tasks such as identifying speaker intentions and resolving anaphoric reference. Previous research has found *The second author was partially supported by NSF Grants No. IRI-90-09018, No. IRI-93-08173, and No. CDA-94-01024 at Harvard University and by AT&T Bell Laboratories. that discourse structural information can be inferred from orthographic cues in text, such as paragraphing and punctuation; from linguistic cues in text or speech, such as CUE PHRASES1 (Cohen, 1984; Reichman, 1985; Grosz and Sidner, 1986; Passonneau and Litman, 1993; Passonneau and Litman, to appear) and other lexical cues (Hinkelman and Allen, 1989); from variation in referring expressions (Linde, 1979; Levy, 1984; Grosz and Sidner, 1986; Webber, 1988; Song and Cohen, 1991; Passonneau and Litman, 1993), tense, and aspect (Schubert and Hwang, 1990; Song and Cohen, 1991); from knowledge of the domain, especially for taskoriented discourses (Grosz, 1978); and from speaker intentions (Carberry, 1990; Litman and Hirschberg, 1990; Lochbaum, 1994). Recent methods for automatic recognition of discourse structure from text have incorporated thesaurus-based and other information retrieval techniques to identify changes in topic (Morris and Hirst, 1991; Yarowsky, 1991; Iwanska et al., 1991; Hearst, 1994; Reynar, 1994). Parallel investigations on prosodic/acoustic cues to discourse structure have investigated the contributions of features such as pitch range, pausal duration, amplitude, speaking rate, and intonational contour to signaling topic change. Variation in pitch range has often been seen as conveying 'topic structure' in discourse. Brown et al. (1980) found that subjects typically started new topics relatively high in their pitch range and finished topics by compressing their range. Silverman (1987) found that manipulation of pitch range alone, or in conjunction with pausal duration between utterances, facilitated the disambiguation of ambiguous topic structures. Avesani and Vayra (1988) also found variation in pitch range in professional recordings which appeared to correlate with topic structure, and Ayers (1992) found that pitch range correlates with hierarchical topic structure more closely in read than spontaneous conversational speech. Duration of pause between utterances or phrases has also been identi'Also called DISCOURSE MARKERS or DISCOURSE PARTICLES, these are items such as now, first, and by the way, which explicitly mark discourse structure. fled as an indicator of topic structure, with longer pauses marking major topic shifts (Lehiste, 1979; Brown, Currie, and Kenworthy, 1980; Avesani and Vayra, 1988; Passonneau and Litman, 1993); Woodbury (1987), however, found no such correlation in his data. Amplitude was also found to increase at the start of a new topic and decrease at the end (Brown, Currie, and Kenworthy, 1980). Swerts and colleagues (1992) found that melody and duration can pre-signal the end of a discourse unit, in addition to marking the discourse-unit-final utterance itself. And speaking rate has been found to correlate with structural variation; in several studies (Lehiste, 1980; Brubaker, 1972; Butterworth, 1975) segment-initial utterances exhibited slower rates, and segment-final, faster rates. Swerts and Ostendorf (1995), however, report negative rate results. In general, these studies have lacked an independently-motivated notion of discourse structure. With few exceptions, they rely on intuitive analyses of topic structure; operational definitions of discourse-level properties (e.g., interpreting paragraph breaks as discourse segment boundaries); or 'theory-neutral' discourse segmentations, where subjects are given instructions to simply mark changes in topic. Recent studies have focused on the question of whether discourse structure itself can be empirically determined in a reliable manner, a prerequisite to investigating linguistic cues to its existence. An intention-based theory of discourse was used in (Hirschberg and Grosz, 1992; Grosz and Hirschberg, 1992) to identify intonational correlates of discourse structure in news stories read by a professional speaker. Discourse structural elements were determined by experts in the Grosz and Sidner (1986) theory of discourse structure, based on either text alone or text and speech. This study revealed strong correlations of aspects of pitch range, amplitude, and timing with features of global and local structure for both segmentation methods. Passonneau and Litman (to appear) analyzed correlations of pause, as well as cue phrases and referential relations, with discourse structure; their segmenters were asked to identify speakers' communicative &quot;actions&quot;. The present study addresses issues of speaking style and segmentation method while exploring in more detail than previous studies the prosodic parameters that characterize initial, medial, and final utterances in a discourse segment.
3 Methods. The current investigation of discourse and intonation is based on analysis of a corpus of spontaneous and read speech, the Boston Directions Corpus.' This 'The Boston Directions Corpus was designed and collected in collaboration with Barbara Grosz. corpus comprises elicited monologues produced by multiple non-professional speakers, who were given written instructions to perform a series of nine increasingly complex direction-giving tasks. Speakers first explained simple routes such as getting from one station to another on the subway, and progressed gradually to the most complex task of planning a round-trip journey from Harvard Square to several Boston tourist sights. Thus, the tasks were designed to require increasing levels of planning complexity. The speakers were provided with various maps, and could write notes to themselves as well as trace routes on the maps. For the duration of the experiment, the speakers were in face-to-face contact with a silent partner (a confederate) who traced on her map the routes described by the speakers. The speech was subsequently orthographically transcribed, with false starts and other speech errors repaired or omitted; subjects returned several weeks after their first recording to read aloud from transcriptions of their own directions. For this paper, the spontaneous and read recordings for one male speaker were acoustically analyzed; fundamental frequency and energy were calculated using Entropic speech analysis software. The prosodic transcription, a more abstract representation of the intonational prominences, phrasing, and melodic contours, was obtained by hand-labeling. We employed the ToBI standard for prosodic transcription (Pitrelli, Beckman, and Hirschberg, 1994), which is based upon Pierrehumbert's theory of American English intonation (Pierrehumbert, 1980). The ToBI transcription provided us with a breakdown of the speech sample into minor or INTERMEDIATE PHRASES (Pierrehumbert, 1980; Beckman and Pierrehumbert, 1986). This level of prosodic phrase served as our primary unit of analysis for measuring both speech and discourse properties. The portion of the corpus we report on consists of 494 and 552 intermediate phrases for read and spontaneous speech, respectively. In our research, the Grosz and Sidner (1986) theory of discourse structure, hereafter G&S, provides a foundation for segmenting discourses into constituent parts. According to this model, at least three components of discourse structure must be distinguished. The utterances composing the discourse divide into segments that may be embedded relative to one another. These segments and the embedding relationships between them form the LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE. The embedding relationships reflect changes in the ATTENTIONAL STATE, the dynamic record of the entities and attributes that are salient during a particular part of the discourse. Changes in linguistic structure, and hence attentional state, depend on the discourse's INTENTIONAL STRUCTURE; this structure comprises the intentions or DISCOURSE SEGMENT PURPOSES (DSPs) underlying the discourse and relations between DSPs. Two methods of discourse segmentation were employed by subjects who had expertise in the G&S theory. Following Hirschberg and Grosz (1992), three subjects labeled from text alone (group T) and three labeled from text and speech (group S). Other than this difference in input modality, all subjects received identical written instructions. The text for each task was presented with line breaks corresponding to intermediate phrase boundaries (i.e., ToBI BREAK INDICES of level 3 or higher (Pitrelli, Beckman, and Hirschberg, 1994)). In the instructions, subjects were essentially asked to analyze the linguistic and intentional structures by segmenting the discourse, identifying the DSPs, and specifying the hierarchical relationships among segments.
4 Results. Labels on which all labelers in the group agreed are termed the CONSENSUS LABELS.3 The consensus labels for segment-initial (SBEG), segment-final (SF), and segment-medial (SCONT, defined as neither SBEG nor SF) phrase labels are given in Table 1.4 Note that group T and group S segmentations differ significantly, in contrast to earlier findings of Hirschberg and Grosz (1992) on a corpus of readaloud news stories and in support of informal findings of Swerts (1995). Table 1 shows that group S produced significantly more consensus boundaries for both read (p<.001, x=58.8, df=1) and spontaneous (p<.001, x=55.4, df=1) speech than did 3Use of consensus labels is a conservative measure of labeler agreement. Results in (Passonneau and Litman, 1993) and (Swerts, 1995) show that with a larger number of labelers, notions of BOUNDARY STRENGTH can be employed. 4Consensus percentages for the three types in Table 1 do not necessarily sum to the total consensus agreement percentage, since a phrase is both segment-initial and segment-final when it makes up a segment by itself. group T. When the read and spontaneous data are pooled, group S agreed upon significantly more SBEG boundaries (p<.05, x=4.7, df=1) as well as SF boundaries (p<.05, x=4.4, df=1) than did group T. Further, it is not the case that text-alone segmenters simply chose to place fewer boundaries in the discourse; if this were so, then we would expect a high percentage of SCONT consensus labels where no SBEGs or SFs were identified. Instead, we find that the number of consensus SCONTs was significantly higher for text-and-speech labelings than for text-alone (p<.001, x=49.1, df=1). It appears that the speech signal can help disambiguate among alternate segmentations of the same text. Finally, the data in Table 1 show that spontaneous speech can be segmented as reliably as its read counterpart, contrary to Ayer's results (1992). Comparisons of inter-labeler reliability, that is, the reproducibility of a coding scheme given multiple labelers, provide another perspective on the segmentation data. How best to measure inter-labeler reliability for discourse segmentation tasks, especially for hierarchical segmentation, is an open research question (Passonneau and Litman, to appear; Carletta, 1995; Flammia and Zue, 1995; Rotondo, 1984; Swerts, 1995). For comparative purposes, we explored several measures proposed in the literature, namely, COCHRAN'S Q and the KAPPA (K) COEFFICIENT (Siegel and Castellan, 1988). Cochran's Q, originally proposed in (Hirschberg and Grosz, 1992) to measure the likelihood that similarity among labelings was due to chance, was not useful in the current study; all tests of similarity using this metric (pairwise, or comparing all labelers) gave probability near zero. We concluded that this statistic did not serve, for example, to capture the differences observed between labelings from text alone versus labelings from text and speech. Recent discourse annotation studies (Isard and Carletta, 1995; Flammia and Zue, 1995) have measured reliability using the K coefficient, which factors out chance agreement taking the expected distribution of categories into account. This coefficient is defined as where Po represents the observed agreement and PE represents the expected agreement. Typically, values of .7 or higher for this measure provide evidence of good reliability, while values of .8 or greater indicate high reliability. Isard and Carletta (1995) report pairwise K scores ranging from .43 to .68 in a study of naive and expert classifications of types of 'moves' in the Map Task dialogues. For theory-neutral discourse segmentations of information-seeking dialogues, Flammia (Flammia and Zue, 1995) reports an average pairwise K of .45 for five labelers and of .68 for the three most similar labelers. An important issue in applying the 1£ coefficient is how one calculates the expected agreement using prior distributions of categories. We first calculated the prior probabilities for our data based simply on the distribution of SBEG versus non-SBEG labels for all labelers on one of the nine directiongiving tasks in this study, with separate calculations for the read and spontaneous versions. This task, which represented about 8% of the data for both speaking styles, was chosen because it was midway in planning complexity and in length among all the tasks. Using these distributions, we calculated tz coefficients for each pair of labelers in each condition for the remaining eight tasks in our corpus. The observed percentage of SBEG labels, prior distribution for SBEG, average of the pairwise n scores, and standard deviations for those scores are presented in The average K scores for group T segmenters indicate weak inter-labeler reliability. In contrast, average i scores for group S are .8 or better, indicating a high degree of inter-labeler reliability. Thus, application of this somewhat stricter reliability metric confirms that the availability of speech critically influences how listeners perceive discourse structure. The calculation of reliability for SBEG versus nonSBEG labeling in effect tests the similarity of linearized segmentations and does not speak to the issue of how similar the labelings are in terms of hierarchical structure. Flammia has proposed a method for generalizing the use of the K coefficient for hierarchical segmentation that gives an upper-bound estimate on inter-labeler agreement.5 We applied this metric to our segmentation data, calculating weighted averages for pairwise n scores averaged for each task. Results for each condition, together with the lowest and highest average n scores over the tasks, are presented in Table 3. Once again, averaged scores of .7 or better for text-and-speech labelings, for both speaking styles, indicate markedly higher inter-labeler reliability than do scores for text-alone labelings, which averaged .51 and .53. For purposes of intonational analysis, we take advantage of the high degree of agreement among our discourse labelers and include in each segment boundary class (SBEG, SF, and SCONT) only the phrases whose classification all subjects agreed upon. We term these the CONSENSUS-LABELED PHRASES, and compare their features to those of all phrases not in the relevant class (i.e., non-consensuslabeled phrases and consensus-labeled phrases of the other types). Note that there were one-third fewer consensus-labeled phrases for text-alone labelings than for text-and-speech (see Table 1). We examined the following acoustic and prosodic features of SBEG, SCONT, and SF consensus-labeled phrases: f0 maximum and f0 average;6 rms (energy) maximum and rms average; speaking rate (measured in syllables per second); and duration of preceding and subsequent silent pauses. As for the segmentation analyses, we compared intonational correlates of segment boundary types not only for group S versus group T, but also for spontaneous versus read speech. While correlates have been identified in read speech, they have been observed in spontaneous speech only rarely and descriptively. 'We calculated 10 maximum in two ways: as simple f0 peak within the intermediate phrase and also as f0 maximum measured at the rms maximum of the sonorant portion of the nuclear-accented syllable in the intermediate phrase (HIGH FO in the ToBI framework (Pitre Beckman, and Hirschberg, 1994)). The latter measure proved more robust, so we report results based on this metric. The same applies to measurement of rms maximum. Average f0 and rms were calculated over the entire intermediate phrase. We found strong correlations for consensus SBEG, SCONT, and SF phrases for all conditions. Results for group T are given in Table 4, and for group S, in Table 5.7 Consensus SBEG phrases in all conditions possess significantly higher maximum and average fO, higher maximum and average rms, shorter subsequent pause, and longer preceding pause. For consensus SCONT phrases, we found some differences between read and spontaneous speech for both labeling methods. Features for group T included significantly lower f0 maximum and average and lower rms maximum and average for read speech, but only lower f0 maximum for the spontaneous condition. Group S features for SCONT were identical to group T except for the absence of a correlation for maximum rms. While SCONT phrases for both speaking styles exhibited significantly shorter preceding and subsequent pauses than other phrases, only the spontaneous condition showed a significantly slower rate. For consensus SF phrases, we again found similar patterns for both speaking styles and both label7T-tests were used to test for statistical significance of difference in the means of two classes of phrases. Results reported are significant at the .005 level or better, except where '*' indicates significance at the .03 level or better. Results were calculated using one-tailed t-tests, except where 'f' indicates a two-tailed test. ing methods, namely lower f0 maximum and average, lower rms maximum and average, faster speaking rate, shorter preceding pauses, and longer subsequent pauses. While it may appear somewhat surprising that results for both labeling methods match so closely, in fact, correlations for text-and-speech labels presented in Table 5 were almost invariably statistically stronger than those for text-alone labels presented in Table 4. These more robust results for text-andspeech labelings occur even though the data set of consensus labels is considerably larger than the data set of consensus text-alone labelings. With a view toward automatically segmenting a spoken discourse, we would like to directly classify phrases of all three discourse categories. But SCONT and SF phrases exhibit similar prominence features and appear distinct from each other only in terms of timing differences. A second issue is whether such classification can be done con-line.' To address both of these issues, we made pairwise comparisons of consensus-labeled phrase groups using measures of relative change in acoustic-prosodic parameters over a local window of two consecutive phrases. Table 6 presents significant findings on relative changes in fO, loudness (measured in decibels), and speaking rate, from prior to current intermediate phrase.8 First, note that SBEG is distinguished from both SCONT and SF in terms of f0 change and db change from prior phrase; that is, while SBEG phrases are distinguished on a variety of measures from all other phrases (including non-consensus-labeled phrases) in Table 5, this table shows that SBEGs are also distinguishable directly from each of the other consensuslabeled categories. Second, while SCONT and SF appear to share prominence features in Table 5, Table 6 reveals differences between SCONT and SF in amount of f0 and db change. Thus, in addition to lending themselves to on-line processing, local measures may also capture valuable prominence cues to distinguish between segment-medial and segmentfinal phrases.
5 Conclusion. Although this paper reports results from only a single speaker, the findings are promising. We have demonstrated that a theory-based method for discourse analysis can provide reliable segmentations of spontaneous as well as read speech. In addition, the availability of speech in the text-and-speech labeling method led to significantly higher reliability scores. The stronger correlations found for intonational features of the text-and-speech labelings suggest not only that discourse labelers make use of prosody in their analyses, but also that obtaining such data can lead to more robust modeling of the relationship between intonation and discourse structure. The following preliminary results can be considered for incorporation in such a model. First, segment-initial utterances differ from medial and final utterances in both prominence and rhythmic properties. Segment-medial and segment-final utterances are distinguished more clearly by rhythmic features, primarily pause. Finally, all correlations found for global parameters can also be computed based on relative change in acoustic-prosodic parameters in a window of two phrases. Ongoing research is addressing the development of automatic classification algorithms for discourse boundary type; the role of prosody in conveying hierarchical relationships among discourse segments; individual speaker differences; and discourse segmentation methods that can be used by naive subjects.