Introduction. 1.1 Motivation. The de-facto web search paradigm defines the re sult to a user?s query as roughly a set of links to the best-matching documents selected out of billions of items available. Whenever the queries search for pinpointed, factual information, the burden of filling the gap between the output granularity (whole documents) and the targeted information (a set of sentences or relevant phrases) stays with theusers, by browsing the returned documents in or der to find the actually relevant bits of information. A frequent case are queries about named entities,which constitute a significant fraction of popu lar web queries according to search engine logs. When submitting queries such as John Williamsor Python, search engine users could also be presented with a compilation of facts and specific at tributes about those named entities, rather than aset of best-matching web pages. One of the chal lenges in creating such an alternative search result page is the inherent ambiguity of the queries, as several instances of the same class (e.g., different people) or different classes (e.g., a type of snake, a programming language, or a movie) may share the same name in the query. As an example, the Work done during a summer internship at Google.contexts below are part of web documents refer ring to different people who share the same name John Williams:1. ?John Williams and the Boston Pops conducted a summer Star Wars concert at Tan glewood.? 2. ?John Williams lost a Taipei death match against his brother, Axl Rotten.? 3. ?John Williams won a Victoria Cross for his actions at the battle of Rorke?s Drift.? The effectiveness of the search could be greatly improved if the search results were grouped together according to the corresponding sense, rather than presented as a flat, sense-mixed list of items (whether links to full-length documents, or extracted facts). As an added benefit, userswould have easier access to a wider variety of re sults, whenever the top 10 or so results returned by the largest search engines happen to refer to only one particular (arguably the most popular) sense of the query (e.g., the programming language in the case of Python), thus submerging or ?hiding? documents that refer to other senses of the query.In various natural language applications, significant performance gains are achieved as a function of data size rather than algorithm complex ity, as illustrated by the increasingly popular use of the web as a (very large) corpus (Dale, 2003). It seems therefore natural to try to exploit the webin order to also improve the performance of relation extraction, i.e. the discovery of useful re lationships between named entities mentioned in text documents. However, if one wants to combine evidence from multiple web pages, then one needs again to solve the name disambiguation problem. 9Without solving it, a relation extraction system an alyzing the sentences in the above example could mistakenly consider the third as evidence that John Williams the composer fought at Rorke?s Drift. 1.2 Approach. The main goal of the research reported in this pa per is to develop a named entity disambiguation method that is intrinsically linked to a dictionarymapping proper names to their possible named en titiy denotations. More exactly, the method: 1. Detects whether a proper name refers to a. named entity included in the dictionary (de tection).
Disambiguates between multiple named enti-. . ties that can be denoted by the same proper name (disambiguation). As a departure from the methodology of previous approaches, the paper exploits a non-traditionalweb-based resource. Concretely, it takes advan tage of some of the human knowledge available in Wikipedia, a free online encyclopedia createdthrough decentralized, collective efforts of thou sands of users (Remy, 2002). We show that the structure of Wikipedia lends itself to a set ofuseful features for the detection and disambiguation of named entities. The remainder of the pa per is organized as follows. Section 2 describes Wikipedia, with an emphasis on the features that are most important to the entity disambiguation task. Section 3 describes the extraction of named entity entries (versus other types of entries) fromWikipedia. Section 4 introduces two disambigua tion methods, which are evaluated experimentally in Section 5. We conclude with future work and conclusions. 2 Wikipedia ? A Wiki Encyclopedia. Wikipedia is a free online encyclopedia writtencollaboratively by volunteers, using a wiki soft ware that allows almost anyone to add and change articles. It is a multilingual resource - there are about 200 language editions with varying levels of coverage. Wikipedia is a very dynamic andquickly growing resource ? articles about news worthy events are often added within days of their occurrence. As an example, the September 2005 version contains 751,666 articles, around 180,000 more articles than four months earlier. The work in this paper is based on the English version from May 2005, which contains 577,860 articles. Each article in Wikipedia is uniquely identified by its title ? a sequence of words separated byunderscores, with the first word always capital ized. Typically, the title is the most common name for the entity described in the article. When the name is ambiguous, it is further qualified with aparenthetical expression. For instance, the arti cle on John Williams the composer has the title John Williams (composer).Because each article describes a specific entity or concept, the remainder of the paper sometimes uses the term ?entity? interchangeably to re fer to both the article and the corresponding entity. Also, let E denote the entire set of entities from Wikipedia. For any entity e2E, e:title is the title name of the corresponding article, and e:T is the text of the article.In general, there is a many-to-many correspon dence between names and entities. This relationis captured in Wikipedia through redirect and dis ambiguation pages, as described in the next two sections. 2.1 Redirect Pages. A redirect page exists for each alternative name that can be used to refer to an entity in Wikipedia. The name is transformed (using underscores for spaces) into a title whose article contains aredirect link to the actual article for that en tity. For example, John Towner Williams is the full name of the composer John Williams. Itis therefore an alternative name for the composer, and consequently the article with the ti tle John Towner Williams is just a pointer to thearticle for John Williams (composer). An exam ple entry with a considerably higher number of redirect pages is United States. Its redirect pages correspond to acronyms (U.S.A., U.S., USA, US),Spanish translations (Los Estados Unidos, Estados Unidos), misspellings (Untied States) or syn onyms (Yankee land). For any given Wikipedia entity e2E, let e:R be the set of all names that redirect to e. 2.2 Disambiguation Pages. Another useful structure is that of disambiguation pages, which are created for ambiguous names, i.e. names that denote two or more entities in Wikipedia. For example, the disambiguation page for the name John Williams lists 22 associated 10 TITLE REDIRECT DISAMBIG CATEGORIES Star Wars music, ... John Williams (composer) John Towner Williams John Williams Film score composers, 20th century classical composers John Williams (wrestler) Ian Rotten John Williams Professional wrestlers, People living in Baltimore John Williams (VC) none John Williams British Army soldiers, British Victoria Cross recipients Boston Pops Orchestra Boston Pops, Pops American orchestras, The Boston Pops Orchestra Massachusetts musicians United States US, USA, ... US, USA, North American countries, United States of America United States Republics, United States Venus, Venus Venus (planet) Planet Venus Morning Star, Planets of the Solar System, Evening Star Planets, Solar System, ... Table 1: Examples of Wikipedia titles, aliases and categories entities. Therefore, besides the non-ambiguous names that come from redirect pages, additionalaliases can be found by looking for all disambiguation pages that list a particular Wikipedia en tity. In his philosophical article ?On Sense and Reference? (Frege, 1999), Gottlob Frege gave a famous argument to show that sense and reference are distinct. In his example, the planet Venus may be referred to using the phrases ?morning star? and ?evening star?. This theoretical example is nicelycaptured in practice in Wikipedia by two disam biguation pages, Morning Star and Evening Star, both listing Venus as a potential referent. For any given Wikipedia entity e 2 E, let e:D be the set of names whose disambiguation pages contain a link to e. 2.3 Categories. Every article in Wikipedia is required to have at least one category. As shown in Table 1, John Williams (composer) is associated with a set of categories, among them Star Wars music, Filmscore composers, and 20th century classical com posers. Categories allow articles to be placed into one or more topics. These topics can be further categorized by associating them with one or more parent categories. In Table 1 Venus is shown asboth an article title and a category. As a cate gory, it has one direct parent Planets of the SolarSystem, which in turn belongs to two more gen eral categories, Planets and Solar System. Thus, categories form a directed acyclic graph, allowingmultiple categorization schemes to co-exist simul taneously. There are in total 59,759 categories in Wikipedia. For a given Wikipedia entity e 2E, let e:C be the set of categories to which e belongs (i.e. e?s immediate categories and all their ancestors in the Wikipedia taxonomy). 2.4 Hyperlinks. Articles in Wikipedia often contain mentions ofentities that already have a corresponding article. When contributing authors mention an ex isting Wikipedia entity inside an article, they arerequired to link at least its first mention to the cor responding article, by using links or piped links.Both types of links are exemplified in the follow ing wiki source code of a sentence from the article on Italy: ?The [[Vatican City|Vatican]] is now an independent enclave surrounded by [[Rome]]?. The string from the second link (?Rome?) denotes the title of the referenced article. The same string is also used in the display version. If the authorwants another string displayed (e.g., ?Vatican? in stead of ?Vatican City?), then the alternative string is included in a piped link, after the title string.Consequently, the display string for the aforementioned example is: ?The Vatican is now an independent enclave surrounded by Rome?. As described later in Section 4, the hyperlinks can pro vide useful training examples for a named entity disambiguator.
A Dictionary of Named Entities. We organize all named entities from Wikipedia into a dictionary structure D, where each string entry d 2 D is mapped to the set of entities d:E that can be denoted by d in Wikipedia. The first step is to identify named entities, i.e. entities with a proper name title. Because every title inWikipedia must begin with a capital letter, the de cision whether a title is a proper name relies on the following sequence of heuristic steps: 11 1. If e:title is a multiword title, check the cap-. italization of all content words, i.e. wordsother than prepositions, determiners, con junctions, relative pronouns or negations. Consider e a named entity if and only if all content words are capitalized. 2. If e:title is a one word title that contains at. least two capital letters, then e is a named en tity. Otherwise, go to step 3. 3. Count how many times e:title occurs in the. text of the article, in positions other than at the beginning of sentences. If at least 75% of these occurrences are capitalized, then e is a named entity. The combined heuristics extract close to half amillion named entities from Wikipedia. The second step constructs the actual dictionary D as fol lows:  The set of entries in D consists of all strings that may denote a named entity, i.e. if e2E is a named entity, then its title name e:title,its redirect names e:R, and its disambigua tion names e:D are all added as entries in D.  Each entry string d2D is mapped to d:E, the set of entities that d may denote in Wikipedia. Consequently, a named entity e is included in d:E if and only if d = e:title, d 2 e:R, or d2e:D.
Named Entity Disambiguation. . As illustrated in Section 1, the same proper name may refer to more than one named entity. Thenamed entity dictionary from Section 3 and the hy perlinks from Wikipedia articles provide a dataset of disambiguated occurrences of proper names,as described in the following. As shown in Section 2.4, each link contains the title name of an en tity, and the proper name (the display string) used to refer to it. We use the term query to denote the occurrence of a proper name inside a Wikipedia article. If there is a dictionary entry matching the proper name in the query q such that the set of denoted entities q:E contains at least two entities, one of them the true answer entity q:e, then the query q is included in the dataset. More exactly, if q:E contains n named entities e 1 , e 2 , ..., e n , then the dataset will be augmented with n pairs hq; e k i represented as follows: hq; e k i = [?(e k ; q:e) j q:T j e k :title] The field q:T contains all words occurring in a limit length window centered on the proper name. The window size is set to 55, which is the value that was observed to give optimum performance in the related task of cross-document coreference (Gooi and Allan, 2004). The Kronecker delta function ?(e k ; q:e) is 1 when e k is the same as the entity q:e referred in the link. Table 2 lists the query pairs created for the three John Williamsqueries from Section 1.1, assuming only three en tities in Wikipedia correspond to this name. Query Text Entity Title 1 Boston Pops conduct ... John Williams (composer). 0 Boston Pops conduct ... John Williams (wrestler). 0 Boston Pops conduct ... John Williams (VC). 1 lost Taipei match ... John Williams (wrestler) 0 lost Taipei match ... John Williams (composer) 0 lost Taipei match ... John Williams (VC) 1 won Victoria Cross ... John Williams (VC) 0 won Victoria Cross ... John Williams (composer) 0 won Victoria Cross ... John Williams (wrestler) Table 2: Disambiguation dataset. The application of this procedure on Wikipedia results into a dataset of 1,783,868 disambiguated queries. 4.1 Context-Article Similarity. Using the representation from the previous sec tion, the name entity disambiguation problem can be cast as a ranking problem. Assuming that an appropriate scoring function score(q; e k) is avail able, the named entity corresponding to query q is defined to be the one with the highest score: e^ = argmax e k score(q; e k ) (1) If e^ = q:e then e^ represents a hit, otherwise e^ is a miss. Disambiguation methods will then differ based on the way they define the scoring function.One ranking function that is evaluated experimen tally in this paper is based on the cosine similarity between the context of the query and the text of the article: score(q; e k ) = cos(q:T; e k :T ) = q:T kq:Tk e k :T ke k :Tk The factors q:T and e k :T are represented in thestandard vector space model, where each compo nent corresponds to a term in the vocabulary, and the term weight is the standard tf  idf score(Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto, 1999). The vo cabulary V is created by reading all Wikipedia 12 articles and recording, for each word stem w, itsdocument frequency df(w) in Wikipedia. Stop words and words that are too frequent or too rareare discarded. A generic document d is then repre sented as a vector of length jV j, with a position for each vocabulary word. If f(w) is the frequency ofword w in document d, and N is the total num ber of Wikipedia articles, then the weight of word w2V in the tf  idf representation of d is: d w = f(w) ln N df(w) (2) 4.2 Taxonomy Kernel. An error analysis of the cosine-based ranking method reveals that, in many cases, the pair hq; ei fails to rank first, even though words from thequery context unambiguously indicate e as the ac tual denoted entity. In these cases, cue words from the context do not appear in e?s article due to two main reasons: 1. The article may be too short or incomplete.. 2. Even though the article captures most of the. relevant concepts expressed in the query con text, it does this by employing synonymous words or phrases. The cosine similarity between q and e k can be seen as an expression of the total degree of correlation between words from the context of query q and a given named entity e k . When the correlation is too. low because the Wikipedia article for named entity e k does not contain all words that are relevant to e k , it is worth considering the correlation between context words and the categories to which e kbe longs. For illustration, consider the two queries for the name John Williams from Figure 1.To avoid clutter, Figure 1 depicts only two enti ties with the name John Williams in Wikipedia: the composer and the wrestler. On top of each entity, the figure shows one of their Wikipedia categories (Film score composers and Professional wrestlersrespectively), together with some of their ances tor categories in the Wikipedia taxonomy. The two query contexts are shown at the bottom of the figure. In the context on the left, words such as conducted and concert denote concepts that are highly correlated with the Musicians, Composers and Film score composers categories. On the other hand, their correlation with other categories in Figure 1 is considerably lower. Consequently, a Musicians Composers Film score composers People by occupation People People known in connection with sports and hobbies Wrestlers Professional wrestlers high correlationshigh correlations ? ? conducted a summer Star Wars John Williams John Williams a Taipei death lost concert match[...] John Williams (composer) John Williams (wrestler) Figure 1: Word-Category correlations. goal of this paper is to design a disambiguationmethod that 1) learns the magnitude of these correlations, and 2) uses these correlations in a scor ing function, together with the cosine similarity. Our intuition is that, given the query context on the left, such a ranking function has a better chance of ranking the ?composer? entity higher than the ?wrestler? entity, when compared with the simple cosine similarity baseline. We consider using a linear ranking function as follows: e^ = argmax e k w (q; e k ) (3) The feature vector (q; e k ) contains a dedicated feature  cos for cosine similarity, and jV j  jCj features  w;c corresponding to combinations of words w from the Wikipedia vocabulary V and categories c from the Wikipedia taxonomy C:  cos (q; e k ) = cos(q:T; e k :T ) (4)  w;c (q; e k ) =  1 if w2q:T and c2e k :C; 0 otherwise: The weight vector w models the magnitude of each word-category correlation, and can be learned by training on the query dataset described at the beginning of Section 4. We used the kernel version of the large-margin ranking approach from (Joachims, 2002) which solves the optimization 13 problem in Figure 2. The aim of this formulation is to find a weight vector w such that 1) the number of ranking constraints w (q; q:e)  w (q; e k )from the training data that are violated is mini mized, and 2) the ranking function w (q; e k ) generalizes well beyond the training data. minimize: V (w; ) = 1 2 w w+ C P  q;k subject to: w ((q; q:e)