discourse utterances that combine into of the discourse, namely, units discourse that are typically larger than a single sentence, but smaller than the complete discourse. However, the constituent structure is not determined solely by the linear sequence of utterances. It is common for two contiguous utterances to be members of different subconstituents of the discourse (as with breaks between phrases in the syntactic analysis of a sentence); likewise, it is common for two utterances that are not contiguous to be members of the same subconstituent. An individual subconstituent of a discourse exhibits both internal coherence and coherence with the other subconstituents. That is, discourses have been shown to of coherence. coherence to the ways in which the larger segments of discourse relate to one another. It depends on such things as the function of a discourse, its subject matter, and rhetorical schema 1977, 1981; Reichman, 19811. coherence refers to the ways in which individual sentences bind together to form larger discourse segments. It depends on such things as the syntactic structure of an utterance, and the use of referring expressions 1Sidner, 19811. The two levels of discourse coherence correspond to two of focusing—global centering. Participants are said to be globally focused on a set of entities relevant to the overall discourse. These entities may either have been explicitly introduced into the discourse or be sufficiently closely related to such entities to be considered implicitly in focus [Grosz, 19811. In contrast. centering refers to a more local focusing process, one relates to identifying the single entity that an individual utterance most centrally concerns (Sidner, 1979; Joshi and Weinstein, 19811. 44 The two levels of focusing/coherence have different effects on the processing of pronominal and nonpronominal definite noun phrases. Global coherence and focusing are major factors in the generation and interpretation of nonpronominal definite referring expressions.- Local coherence and centering have greater effect on the processing of pronominal expressions. In Section 5 we shall describe the rules governing the use of these kinds of expressions and shall explain why additional processing by the hearer (needed for drawing additional inferences) is involved when pronominal expressions are used to refer to globally focused entities or nonpronominal expressions are used to refer to centered entities. Many approaches to language interpretation have ignored these differences, depending instead on powerful inference mechanisms to identify the referents of referring expressions. Although such approaches may suffice, especially for well-formed texts, they are insufficient in general. In particular, such approaches will not work for generation. Here the relationships among focusing, coherence, and referring expressions are essential and must be explicitly provided for. Theories—and systems based on them--will generate unacceptable uses of referring expressions if they do not take these into 3. Centering and Anaphora theory, the centers of a sentence in a discourse serve to integrate that sentence into the discourse. Each S, has a single center, a set of centers, Cb(S) serves to link S to the preceding discourse, while Cf(S) provides a set of entities to which the succeeding discourse may be linked. To avoid confusion, the phrase 'the center' will he used to refer only to Cb(S). To clarify the notion of center, we will consider a number of discourses illustrating the various factors that combined in (abstractly) and in its identification in a discourse. In Section 5 we define center more precisely, show how it relates to Sidner's [19811 immediate focus and potential foci, and discuss how the linkages established by the centers of a sentence help to determine the degree of intelligibility of a discourse. We begin by showing that the center cannot be defined in syntactic terms alone. The interaction of semantics and centering is more complex and is discussed in Section 4. The following examples, drawn from Reinhart [19821, illustrate the point that the notion of center is not i.e., the syntax of a sentence S not determine which of its NPs (The differ in other respects also. Reichman [19811 and Grosz 110811 discuss some of these. attempts to incorporate focusing mechanisms in generation systems are described in [Appelt, 1981 and McKeown, 19821. can obviously affect the interpretation; for of this paper, it may be regarded as part of a for the use of this terminology discussed (la) Who did Max see yesterday? (lb) Max saw Rosa. (2a) Did anyone see Rosa yesterday? (2b) Max saw Rosa. (lb) and (2b) are identical, Cb(lb) Max and Cb(2b) is Rosa. This can be seen in part by noticing that saw Rosa' seems more natural than (Ib) *Max saw her' than (2b) (a fact consistent with the centering rule introduced in Section 5.) The subject NP is the center in one context, the object NP in the other. when the NP used to realize Cb(S) syntactically determined, the Cb(S) itself is not yet fully determined, for Cb(S) is typically not a linguistic entity (i.e., it is not a particular linguistic expression). Rosa, not 'Rosa' is the Cb(2b). Consider. the discourse: (3a) How is Rosa? (3b) Did anyone see her yesterday? saw her. Here, Cb(3c) is Rosa, but clearly would not be in other contexts where the expression 'her' still realized the backward-looking center of 'Max saw her.' This is seen most simply by considering the discourse that would result if &quot;How is Joan?' replaced (3a). In the discourse that resulted, Joan, not Rosa, would be the center of (3c). 4. Centering and Realization The interactions of semantic and pragmatic factors with centering and their effects on referring expressions are more complex than the preceding discussion suggests. In the examples given above, the NPs that realize Cb(S) also denote it, but this is not always the case: we used the term 'realize' in the above discussion advisedly. In this section, we consider two kinds of examples in which the center of a sentence is not simply the denotation of some noun phrase occurring in the sentence. First, we will examine several examples in which the choice of and interaction among different kinds of interpretations of definite noun phrases are affected by the local discourse context (i.e., centering). Second, the role of pragmatic factors in some problematic cases of referential uses of definite descriptions [Donnellan 19661 is discussed. 4.1. Realization and Value-Free and Value-Loaded Interpretations distinction between semantic denotation is necessary to treat the interaction between value-free and value-loaded interpretations [Barwise and Perry, 19821 of definite descriptions, as they occur in extended discourse. Consider, for example, the following sequence: (4a) The vice president of the United States is also president of the Senate. (4b) Historically, he is the president's key man in negotiations with Congress. to China, he handled tricky negotiations, so he prepared for this Cb(4b) and Cb(4b') are each realized by the anaphoric element 'he.' But (4b) expresses the same thing as 'Historically, the vice president of the United States is the president's key man in negotiations with Congress' (in which it is clear that no single individual vice president is being referred to) whereas (4b1 expresses the same thing as, 'As ambassador to China, the [person who is now] vice president of the United States handled many tricky negotiations,...' This can be accounted for by observing that 'the vice president of the United States' contributes both its value-free interpretation and its value-loading at the world type to Cf(4a). Cb(4b) is then the value-free interpretation and Cb(4b') is the valueloading, i.e., George Bush. In this example, both value-free and value-loaded interpretations are shown to stern from the same full definite noun phrase. It is also possible for the movement of the center from a value-free interpretation (for Cb(S)) to a value-loaded interpretation (for Cb of the next sentence)--or vice versa—to be accomplished solely with pronouns. That is, although (4b)-(4b1 is (at least for some readers) not a natural dialogue, similar sequences are possible. There appear to be strong constraints on the kinds of transitions that are allowed. In particular, if a given sentence forces either the value-free or value-loaded interpretation, then only that interpretation becomes possible in a subsequent sentence. However, if some sentence in a given context merely prefers one interpretation while allowing the other, then either one is possible in a subsequent sentence. For example, the sequence (6a) The vice president of the United States also president Senate. the president's key aan in negotiations vith Congress. in which 'he' may be interpreted as either value-free or (VL), may be followed by either of following As to China, he zany tricky negotiations. is required to be at least old. However, if we change (5b) to force the value-loaded interpretation, as in (5b&quot;), then only (5c) is possible. (Sb') Right now he is the president's key man in negotiations with Congress. Similarly, if (5b) is changed to force the value-free interpretation, as in (4b), then only (5c') is possible. If an intermediate sentence allows both interpretations but prefers one in a given context, then either is possible in the third sentence. A use with preference for a valueloaded interpretation followed by a use indicating the value-free interpretation is illustrated in the sequence: John thinks that the telephone is a toy. it every day. (11 preferred; ok) He doesn't realize that it is an invention changed the world. preference a value-free interpretation that is by value-loaded one is easiest to see in a dialogue situation; vice president of the United States is also president of the Senate. I he played some role in the House. (VF preferred; VL did, but that was before he was Realization and Use these examples, might appear that the concepts of value-free and value-loaded interpretation are identical to DonneIlan's 119661 attributive and referential uses of noun phrases. However, there is an important difference between these two distinctions. The importance to our theory is that the referential use of definite noun phrases introduces the need to take pragmatic factors (in particular speaker intention) into account, not just semantic factors. Donnellan [1966] describes the referential and uses of descriptions in the following way: 'A speaker who uses a definite description attributively in an assertion states something whoever or whatever is the so-and-so. speaker who uses a definite description referentially in an assertion, on the other hand, uses the description to enable his audience to pick out whom or what he is talking about and states something about that person or thing. In the first case the definite description might be said to occur essentially, for the speaker wishes to assert something about whatever or whoever fits that description; but in the referential use the definite description is merely one tool for doing a certain job--calling attention to a person or thing--and in general any other device for doing the same job, another description or a name, would do as well. In the attributive use, the attribute of being the so-and-so is all important, while it is not in the referential use.' The distinction Donnellan suggests can be formulated in terms of the different propositions a sentence S containing a definite description D may be used to express on different occasions of use. When D is used referentially, it contributes its denotation to the proposition expressed by 46 S; when it is used attributively, it contributes to the proposition expressed by S a semantic interpretation related to the descriptive content of D. The identity of this semantic interpretation is not something about which Donnellan is explicit. Distinct formal treatments of the semantics of definite descriptions in natural language would construe the appropriate interpretation differently. In semantic treatments based on possible worlds, the appropriate interpretation would be a (partial) function from possible worlds to objects; in the situation semantics expounded by Barwise and Perry, the appropriate interpretation is a (partial) function from resource to objects. As just described, the referential-attributive distinction appears to be exactly the distinction that Barwise and Perry formulate in terms of the value-loaded and valuefree interpretations of definite noun phrases. But this gloss omits an essential aspect of the referentialattributive distinction as elaborated by Donnellan. In view, a speaker may use referentially to refer to an object distinct from the semantic denotation of the description, and, moreover, to refer to an object even when the description has no semantic denotation. In one sense, this phenomenon arises within the framework of Barwise and Perry's treatment of descriptions. If we understand the semantic denotation of a description to be the unique object that satisfies the content of the description, if there is one, then Barwise and Perry would allow that there are referential uses of a description D that contribute objects other than the semantic denotation of D to the propositions expressed by uses of sentences in which D occurs. But this is only because Barwise and Perry allow that a description may be evaluated at a resource situation other than the complete situation in order to arrive at its denotation on a given occasion of use. Still, the denotation of the description relative to a given resource situation is the unique object in the situation that satisfies the description relative to that situation. The referential uses of descriptions that Donnellan gives of do seem to arise by evaluation of descriptions at alternative resource situations, but rather through the *referential intentions' of the speaker in his of the description. aspect of referential use is a rather a semantic phenomenon and is best analyzed in terms of the distinction between semantic reference and speaker's reference elaborated in Kripke [10771. the following discourses from Kripke [10771: 'any situation on which the speaker can focus attention is a potential candidate for a resource situation with to which the speaker may value load uses of descriptions. Such resource situations must contain a unique object satisfies description. husband is kind to her. NO. isn't. The can you're referring to isn't her husband. Her husband to He her isn't her husband. With (6a) and (7a), Kripke has in mind a case like the one discussed in Donnellan [19661, in which a speaker uses a description to refer to something other than the referent of that description, the unique thing that satisfies the description (if there is one). Kripke analyzes this case as an instance of the general phenomenon of a clash of intentions in language use. In the case at hand, the speaker has a general intention to use the description to refer to its semantic referent; his intention, distinct from general semantic intention, is to use it to refer to a particular individual. He incorrectly believes that these two intentions coincide this gives rise to a use of referring expression in which the speaker's reference reference are (The speaker's referent is presumably the woman's lover). From our point of view, the importance of the case resides in its showing that Cf(S) may include more than one entity, that is realized by a single NP in S. In this case, 'her husband' contributes both the husband and the lover to Cf(6a) and Cf(7a). This can be seen by observing that both discourses seem equally appropriate and that the backward-looking centers of (6b) and (7b) are the husband and the lover, respectively, realized by their anaphoric elements. Hence, the forward-looking centers of a sentence may be related not semantically but to the that realize Hence, the importance of the referential/attributive distinction from our point of view is that it leads to cases in which the centers of a sentence may be pragmatically rather than semantically related to the noun phrases that realize them. 5. Center Movement and Center Realization-- Constraints En the foregoing sections we have discussed a number of examples to illustrate two essential points. First, the noun phrase that realizes the backward-looking center of an utterance in a discourse cannot be determined from the of the utterance alone. Second, the relation c noun phrases centers solely a semantic a pragmatic relation. This discussion has proceeded at a rather intuitive level, without explicit elaboration of the framework we regard as appropriate for dealing with centering and its role in explaining discourse phenomena. Before going on to describe constraints on the realization relation that are, of course, several alternative explanations; e.g., the may believe that the description is more likely than to be interpreted correctly by the hearer. Ferreting out the in a given situation requires of belief and the like. A discussion of issues is beyond the this paper. 67 explain certain phenomena in discourse, we should be somewhat more explicit about the notions of center and realization. We have said that each utterance S in a discourse has associated with it a backward-looking center, Cb(S), and a set of forward-looking centers, Cf(S). What manner of objects are these centers? They are the sort of objects that can serve as the semantic interpretations of singular That is, either they are objects in the world (e.g., planets, people, numbers) or they are functions from possible worlds (situations, etc.) to objects in the world that can be used to interpret definite descriptions. That is, whatever serves to interpret a definite noun phrase can be a center. For the sake of concreteness in many of the examples in the preceding discussion, we have relied on the situation semantics of Barwise and Perry. The theory we are developing does not depend on this particular semantical treatment of definite noun phrases, but it does require several of the distinctions that treatment provides. In particular, our theory requires a semantical treatment that accommodates the distinction between interpretations of definite noun phrases that contribute their content to the propositions expressed by sentences in which they occur and interpretations that contribute only their denotation—in other words, the distinction between value-free and value-loaded interpretations. As noted, a distinction of this sort can be effected within the framework of 'possible-worlds' approaches to the semantics of natural language. In addition, we see the need for interpretations of definite noun phrases to be dependent on their discourse context. Once again, this is a feature of interpretations that is accommodated in the relational approach to semantics advocated by Barwise and Perry, but it might be accommodated within other as Given that Cb(S), the center of sentence S in a discourse, is the interpretation of a definite noun phrase, how does it become related to S? In a typical example, S will contain a full definite noun phrase or pronoun that realizes the center. The realization relation is neither nor pragmatic. For example, realizes c in cases where a definite description and is interpretation, or an object related to it by a 'speaker's reference.' More when is pronoun, the principles that which c are such that realizes c from neither semantics nor pragmatics exclusively. They are principles that must be elicited from the study of itself. A tentative formulation of some principles is given below. it is typical that, when a center of S, S an that realizes c, is by no means necessary. In particular, for sentences containing noun treatment of our theory we will consider centers that are realized by constituents in other syntactic categories. 119831 discusses some of these issues and compares several of with Montague semantics. phrases that express functional relations (e.g., 'the door,' 'the owner') whose arguments are not exhibited explicitly (e.g., a house is the current center, but so far its door nor its owner has been it is the case that such argument can be backward-looking center of the sentence. We are studying such and expect to integrate that into our theory of discourse The basic rule that constrains the realization of the backward-looking center of an utterance is a constraint on the speaker, namely: the Cb the current utterance is the same as the of the previous utterance, a pronoun should be are two things to about this rule. First, it not preclude using for other entities as long as one is used for the center. Second, it is not a hard but rather principle, like a Gricean maxim, that violated. However, such violations lead at best to in which the is forced to draw additional inferences. simple example, consider the following sequence, assuming at the outset that John is the center of the discourse: (8a) He called up Mike yesterday. (he=John) (8b) He vas annoyed by John's call.