Table 3: Frequency of parse error types. hancements that can be used to address it. 4.1 Analysis by error type and PCFG-enrichment fixes Multilevel VP adjunction errors (Figure 5) are common in models without parent annotation, although even with parent annotation the presence of VP coordination would give multilevel VP adjunction nonzero probability. We address this error by taking advantage of the CTB's principled VP annotation practices, marking adjunction, complementation, and coordination VP levels, which builds the flat adjunction constraint back into the structure of the head daughter. NP-NP modification, depicted in NNM± in Figure 4, was the most common error seen; the greater prevalence of false positives is likely a result of the overall PCFG parsing preference for flatter structures. This type of parse ambiguity is grounded in the semantic ambiguity of compound noun interpretation. This semantic ambiguity exists in English as well, as in the NP-NP modification false positive/negative PNM{+/—} (non-NP) prenominal mod. false positive/negative CRD{H,L}{V,N} incorrect {high/low} coordination attachment of righthand {verbal/nominal} material X/Y incorrect adjunction into X; rect site was Y mistag X/Y category Y mistagged as X that only mistaggings leading to constituentlevel parse errors were tallied. VP (-ADJ) ADVP ADVP VP (-COMP) NP AD AD VV NP 1 1 1 NP i• Itg 4k 4g* A A Fi' positively investigate profession NR NN NR I I I NN VP i4 A * 01 ADVP VP Shanghai customs Chorigm rig office AD ADVP VP I NR NN NR NN i• AD VV NP I I I I i4 A * 01 044' Itg 4k 4g* A A Fi' Shanghai customs Chorigming office positively investigate high-risk profession NP NNM±* Figure 5: Flat (corpus) versus multilevel (incorrect-parse) adjunction. Parenthesized material is category-modification. CP NP I exports NP VP -** NP VP -** VV NP realized I gross exports CRDHN* NP PU NP NP problems CRDLN CP NP NP PU NP unmet • fig_ conditions ë problems VP NP ADVP VP nationwide most long NP VP ADVP VP nationwide -------most long Figure 4: Major parse ambiguities. Starred examples are correct in corpus; alternates are parse errors. string speculator Richard Denthese structures are typically bracketed flat in the ETB, underspecifying the semantic relations relative to the CTB. In CTB parsing, this type of ambiguity is difficult to resolve; different compound NP parses differ in dependency structure, so the dependency model resolves errors when word frequencies are large enough to be reliable, but this is often not possible. We found that the internal distributions of (i) NP modifiers of NPs and (ii) left-modified NPs both differ from the internal distribution of NPs in general; we take advantage of this in the PCFG model by marking both types (i) and (ii), which reduces the bias against NP-NP modification in compound NPs. Prenominal modification errors, illustrated in PNM of Figure 4, are rather infrequent, despite the natural parallel with PP attachment ambiguity in English. Due to the highly articulated structure of prenominal modifiers, it seems difficult to address this problem directly; one measure we found somewhat successful is to mark IP daughters of prenominal modification. Coordination scope errors occured in two major varieties: those where the misattached right conjunct is verbal (a VP or IP), and those where it is nominal the latter case is illustrated in and CRDLN in Figure The equivverbal coordination is generally marked with commas, whereas nominal coordination is marked with conjoiners or the mostly noun-conjoining punctuation mark &quot;, &quot; IP NP heretofore unmet conditions NP IP IP NP VP IP PU IP PU IP NP VP he I I president may VV him say president may he I meet him 120, say Figure 6: Ambiguity between communication verb subcategorization frame (left; corpus) and high coordination attachment (right; incorrect parse). ocal majority of low over high verbal attachment errors contrasts qualitatively with ETB parsing, where low attachment is more common and parsers tend to err toward high attachment. There are two major sources of ambiguous attachment sites: (i) any VP can be parsed as an IP plus a unary IP—NP, so due to pro-drop any VP coordination is ambiguous with a higher IP coordination; (ii) VPs are multilevel, giving rise to ambiguities of scope over adjuncts. It seems that (i) is a difficult problem; in some cases, certain &quot;discourse-level&quot; adverbs such as IP modification and are thus strong indicators of high attachment. To capture this we mark those adverbs possessing an IP grandparent. We address (ii) to some extent by marking VPs as adjunction or complementation structures, as shown before in Figure 5; in training data, only like-type VPs are coordinated. With nominal coordination scope errors, the situation is different: we found no false low attachments. False high scopings can be reduced by marking NP conjuncts. (Charniak, 2000) claims that a similar strategy proved effective for WSJ parsing.