1 Introduction. The BioNLP Shared Task (BioNLP-ST, hereafter) is a series of efforts to promote a communitywide collaboration towards fine-grained information extraction (IE) in biomedical domain. The first event, BioNLP-ST 2009, introducing a biomolecular event (bio-event) extraction task to the community, attracted a wide attention, with 42 teams being registered for participation and 24 teams submitting final results (Kim et al., 2009). To establish a community effort, the organizers provided the task definition, benchmark data, and evaluations, and the participants competed in developing systems to perform the task. Meanwhile, participants and organizers communicated to develop a better setup of evaluation, and some provided their tools and resources for other participants, making it a collaborative competition. The final results enabled to observe the state-ofthe-art performance of the community on the bioevent extraction task, which showed that the automatic extraction of simple events - those with unary arguments, e.g. gene expression, localization, phosphorylation - could be achieved at the performance level of 70% in F-score, but the extraction of complex events, e.g. binding and regulation, was a lot more challenging, having achieved 40% of performance level. After BioNLP-ST 2009, all the resources from the event were released to the public, to encourage continuous efforts for further advancement. Since then, several improvements have been reported (Miwa et al., 2010b; Poon and Vanderwende, 2010; Vlachos, 2010; Miwa et al., 2010a; Bj¨orne et al., 2010). For example, Miwa et al. (Miwa et al., 2010b) reported a significant improvement with binding events, achieving 50% of performance level. The task introduced in BioNLP-ST 2009 was renamed to Genia event (GE) task, and was hosted again in BioNLP-ST 2011, which also hosted four other IE tasks and three supporting tasks (Kim et al., 2011). As the sole task that was repeated in the two events, the GE task was referenced during the development of other tasks, and took the role of connecting the results of the 2009 event to the main tasks of 2011. The GE task in 2011 received final submissions from 15 teams. The results show the community made a significant progress with the task, and also show the technology can be generalized to full papers at moderate cost of performance. This paper presents the task setup, preparation, and discusses the results.
2 Task Definition. The GE task follows the task definition of BioNLPST 2009, which is briefly described in this section. For more detail, please refer to (Kim et al., 2009). Table 1 shows the event types to be addressed in the task. For each event type, the primary and secondary arguments to be extracted with an event are defined. For example, a Phosphorylation event is primarily extracted with the protein to be phosphorylated. As secondary information, the specific site to be phosphorylated may be extracted. From a computational point of view, the event types represent different levels of complexity. When only primary arguments are considered, the first five event types in Table 1 are classified as simple event types, requiring only unary arguments. The Binding and Regulation types are more complex: Binding requires detection of an arbitrary number of arguments, and Regulation requires detection of recursive event structure. Based on the definition of event types, the entire task is divided to three sub-tasks addressing event extraction at different levels of specificity: Task 1. Core event extraction addresses the extraction of typed events together with their primary arguments. Task 2. Event enrichment addresses the extraction of secondary arguments that further specify the events extracted in Task 1. addresses the detection of negations and speculations over the extracted events. Task 1 serves as the backbone of the GE task and is mandatory for all participants, while the other two are optional. Figure 1 shows an example of event annotation. The event encoded in the text is represented in a standoff-style annotation as follows: The annotation T1 identifies the entity referred to by the string (p65) between the character offsets, 15 and 18 to be a Protein. T2 identifies the string, translocation, to refer to a Localization event. Entities other than proteins or event type references are classified into a default class Entity, as in T3. E1 then represents the event defined by the three entities, as defined in Table 1. Note that for Task 1, the entity, T3, does not need to be identified, and the event, E1, may be identified without specification of the secondary argument, ToLoc:T1: Finding the full representation of E1 is the goal of Task 2. In the example, the localization event, E1, is negated as expressed in the failure of. Finding the negation, M1 is the goal of Task 3.
3 Data preparation. The data sets are prepared in two collections: the abstract and the full text collections. The abstract collection includes the same data used for BioNLPST 2009, and is meant to be used to measure the progress of the community. The full text collection includes full papers which are newly annotated, and is meant to be used to measure the generalization of the technology to full papers. Table 2 shows the statistics of the annotations in the GE task data sets. Since the training data from the full text collection is relatively small despite of the expected rich variety of expressions in full text, it is expected that ‘generalization’ of a model from the abstract collection to full papers would be a key technique to get a reasonable performance. A full paper consists of several sections including the title, abstract, introduction, results, conclusion, methods, and so on. Different sections would be written with different purposes, which may affect the type of information that are found in the sections. Table 3 shows the distribution of annotations in different sections. It indicates that event mentions, according to the event definition in Table 1, in Methods and Captions are much less frequent than in the other TIAB, Intro. and R/D/C sections. Figure 2 illustrates the different distribution of annotated event types in the five sections. It is notable that the Methods section (depicted in blue) shows very different distribution compared to others: while Regulation and Positive regulation events are not as frequent as in other sections, Negative regulation is relatively much more frequent. It may agree with an intuition that experimental devices, which will be explained in Methods sections, often consists of artificial processes that are designed to cause a negative regulatory effect, e.g. mutation, addition of inhibitor proteins, etc. This observation suggests a different event annotation scheme, or a different event extraction strategy would be required for Methods sections.
4 Participation. In total, 15 teams submitted final results. All 15 teams participated in the mandatory Task 1, four teams in Task 2, and two teams in Task 3. Only one team, UTurku, completed all the three tasks. Table 4 shows the profile of the teams, excepting three who chose to remain anonymous. A brief examination on the team organization (the People column) suggests the importance of a computer science background, C and BI, to perform the GE task, which agrees with the same observation made in 2009. It is interpreted as follows: the role of computer scientists may be emphasized in part due to the fact that the task requires complex computational modeling, demanding particular efforts in framework design and implementation and computational resources. The ’09 column suggests that previous experience in the task may have affected to the performance of the teams, especially in a complex task like the GE task. Table 5 shows the profile of the systems. A notable observation is that four teams developed their systems based on the model of UTurku09 (Bj¨orne et al., 2009) which was the winning system of BioNLP-ST 2009. It may show an influence of the BioNLP-ST series in the task. For syntactic analyses, the prevailing use of Charniak Johnson re-ranking parser (Charniak and Johnson, 2005) using the self-trained biomedical model from McClosky (2008) (McCCJ) which is converted to Stanford Dependency (de Marneffe et al., 2006) is notable, which may also be an influence from the results of BioNLP-ST 2009. The last two teams, XABioNLP and HCMUS, who did not use syntactic analyses could not get a performance comparable to the others, which may suggest the importance of using syntactic analyses for a complex IE task like GE task.
5 Results. Table 6 shows the final evaluation results of Task 1. For reference, the reported performance of the two systems, UTurku09 and Miwa10 is listed in the top. UTurku09 was the winning system of Task 1 in 2009 (Bj¨orne et al., 2009), and Miwa10 was the best system reported after BioNLP-ST 2009 (Miwa et al., 2010b). Particularly, the latter made an impressive improvement with Binding events (44.41%—*52.62%). The best performance in Task 1 this time is achieved by the FAUST system, which adopts a combination model of UMass and Stanford. Its performance on the abstract collection, 56.04%, demonstrates a significant improvement of the community in the repeated GE task, when compared to both UTurku09, 51.95% and Miwa10, 53.29%. The biggest improvement is made to the Regulation events (40.11%—*46.97%) which requires a complex modeling for recursive event structure - an event may become an argument of another event. The second ranked system, UMass, shows the best performance on the full paper collection. It suggests that what FAUST obtained from the model combination might be a better optimization to abstracts. The ConcordU system is notable as it is the sole rule-based system that is ranked above the average. It shows a performance optimized for precision with relatively low recall. The same tendency is roughly replicated by other rule-based systems, CCP-BTMG, TM-SCS, XABioNLP, and HCMUS. It suggests that a rule-based system might not be a good choice if a high coverage is desired. However, the performance of ConcordU for simple events suggests that a high precision can be achieved by a rule based system with a modest loss of recall. It might be more true when the task is less complex. This time, three teams achieved better results than Miwa10, which indicates some role of focused efforts like BioNLP-ST. The comparison between the performance on abstract and full paper collections shows that generalization to full papers is feasible with very modest loss in performance. also generalization to full papers. To our disappointment, however, an effective use of supporting task results was not observed, which thus remains as future work for further improvement. Tables 7 shows final evaluation results of Task 2. For reference, the reported performance of the taskwinning system in 2009, UT+DBCLS09 (Riedel et al., 2009), is shown in the top. The first and second ranked system, FAUST and Umass, which share a same author with Riedel09, made a significant improvement over Riedel09 in the abstract collection. UTurku achieved the best performance in finding sites arguments but did not produce location arguments. In table 7, the performance of all the systems in full text collection suggests that finding secondary arguments in full text is much more challenging. In detail, a significant improvement was made for Location arguments (36.59%—*50.00%). A further breakdown of the results of site extraction, shown in table 8, shows that finding site arguments for Phosphorylation, Binding and Regulation events are all significantly improved, but in different ways. The extraction of protein sites to be phosphorylated is approaching a practical level of performance (84.21%), while protein sites to be bound or to be regulated remains challenging to be extracted. Table 9 shows final evaluation results of Task 3. For reference, the reported performance of the taskwinning system in 2009, Kilicoglu09(Kilicoglu and Bergler, 2009), is shown in the top. Among the two teams participated in the task, UTurku showed a better performance in extracting negated events, while ConcordU showed a better performance in extracting speculated events.
6 Conclusions. The Genia event task which was repeated for BioNLP-ST 2009 and 2011 took a role of measuring the progress of the community and generalization IE technology to full papers. The results from 15 teams who made their final submissions to the task show that a clear advance of the community in terms of the performance on a focused domain and
Acknowledgments. This work is supported by the “Integrated Database Project” funded by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.