The first issue to consider is what the analysis will be used for and what constraints this places on its form. The corpus analysis literature contains a variety of proposals, ranging from part-of-speech tagging to assignment of a unique, sophisticated syntactic analysis. Our eventual goal is to recover a semantically and pragmatically appropriate syntactic analysis capable of supporting semantic interpretation. Two stringent requirements follow immediately: firstly, the analyses assigned must determinately represent the syntactic relations that hold between all constituents in the input; secondly, they be drawn from an priori well-formed set of possible syntactic analyses (such as the set defined by a generative grammar). Otherwise, semantic interpretation of the resultant analyses cannot be guaranteed to be (structurally) unambiguous, and the semantic operations defined (over syntactic configurations) cannot be guaranteed to match and yield an interpretation. These requirements immediately suggest that approaches that recover only lexical tags (e.g. de Rose 1988) or a syntactic analysis that is the 'closest fit' to some previously defined set of possible analyses (e.g. Sampson, Haigh, and Atwell 1989), are inadequate (taken alone). Pioneering approaches to corpus analysis proceeded on the assumption that computationally tractable generative grammars of sufficiently general coverage could not be developed (see, for example, papers in Garside, Leech, and Sampson 1987). However, the development of wide-coverage declarative and computationally tractable grammars makes this assumption questionable. For example, the ANLT word and sentence grammar (Grover et al. 1989; Carroll and Grover 1989) consists of an English lexicon of approximately 40,000 lexemes and a 'compiled' fixed-arity term unification grammar containing around 700 phrase structure rules. Taylor, Grover, and Briscoe (1989) demonstrate that an earlier version of this grammar was capable of assigning the correct analysis to 96.8% of a corpus of 10,000 noun phrases extracted (without regard for their internal form) from a variety of corpora. However, although Taylor, and show that the ANLT grammar very wide coverage, they abstract away from issues of lexical idiosyncrasy by formimg equivalence classes of noun phrases and parsing a single token of each class, and they do not address the issues of 1) tuning a grammar to a particular corpus or sublanguage 2) selecting the correct analysis from the set licensed by the grammar and 3) providing reliable analyses of input outside the coverage of the grammar. Firstly, it is clear that vocabulary, idiom, and conventionalized constructions used in, say, legal language and dictionary definitions, will differ both in terms of the range and frequency of words and constructions deployed. Secondly, Church and Patil (1982) demonstrate that for a realistic grammar parsing realistic input, the set of possible analyses licensed by the grammar can be in the thousands. Finally, it is extremely unlikely that any generative grammar will ever be capable of correctly analyzing all naturally occurring input, even when tuned for a particular corpus or sublanguage (if only because of the synchronic idealization implicit in the assumption that the set of grammatical sentences of a language is well formed.) this paper, we describe our to the first and second problems and make some preliminary remarks concerning the third (far harder) problem. Our apto grammar tuning is based on a semi-automatic parsing phase which additions to the grammar are made manually and statistical information concerning the frequency of use of grammar rules is acquired. Using this statistical information and modified grammar, a breadth-first probabilistic parser is constructed. The latter is capable of ranking the possible parses identified by the grammar in a useful (and efficient) manner. However, (unseen) sentences whose correct analysis is outside the coverage of the grammar reri:ain a problem. The feasibility and usefulness of our approach has been investigated in a preliminary way by analyzing a small corpus of 26 Ted Briscoe and John Carroll Generalized Probabilistic LR Parsing definitions drawn from the Dictionary of Contemporary English (Procter 1978). This corpus was chosen because the vocabulary employed is restricted (to approximately 2,000 morphemes), average definition length is about 10 words (with a maximum of around 30), and each definition is independent, allowing us to ignore phenomena such as ellipsis. In addition, the language of definitions represents a recognizable sublanguage, allowing us to explore the task of tuning a general purpose grammar. The results reported below suggest that probabilistic information concerning the frequency of occurrence of syntactic rules correlates in a useful (though not absolute) way with the semantically and pragmatically most plausible analysis. In Section 2, we briefly review extant work on probabilistic approaches to corpus analysis and parsing and argue the need for a more refined probabilistic model to distinguish distinct derivations. Section 3 discusses work on LR parsing of natural language and presents our technique for automatic construction of LR parsers for unification-based grammars. Section 4 presents the method and results for constructing a LALR(1) parse table for the ANLT grammar and discusses these in the light of both computational complexity and other empirical results concerning parse table size and construction time. Section 5 motivates our interactive and incremental approach to semi-automatic production of a disambiguated training corpus and describes the variant of the LR parser used for this task. Section 6 describes our implementation of a breadth-first LR parser and compares its performance empirically to a highly optimized chart parser for the same grammar, suggesting that (optimized) LR parsing is more efficient in practice for the ANLT grammar despite exponential worst case complexity results. Section 7 explains the technique we employ for deriving a probabilistic version of the LR parse table from the training corpus, and demonstrates that this leads to a more refined and parse-context—dependent probabilistic model capable of distinguishing derivations that in a probabilistic context-free model would be equally probable. Section 8 describes and presents the results of our first experiment parsing LDOCE noun definitions, and Section 9 draws some preliminary conclusions and outlines ways in which the work described should be modified and extended. 2. Probabilistic Approaches to Parsing In the field of speech recognition, statistical techniques based on hidden Markov mod