. In recent years, the kappa coefficient of agreement has become the de facto standard for evaluating intercoder agreement for tagging tasks. In this squib, we highlight issues that affect κ and that the community has largely neglected. First, we discuss the assumptions underlying different computations of the expected agreement component of κ. Second, we discuss how prevalence and bias affect the κ measure. In the last few years, coded corpora have acquired an increasing importance in every aspect of human-language technology. Tagging for many phenomena, such as dialogue acts (Carletta et al. 1997; Di Eugenio et al. 2000), requires coders to make subtle distinctions among categories. The objectivity of these decisions can be assessed by evaluating the reliability of the tagging, namely, whether the coders reach a satisfying level of agreement when they perform the same coding task. Currently, the de facto standard for assessing intercoder agreement is the κ coefficient, which factors out expected agreement (Cohen 1960; Krippendorff 1980). κ had long been used in content analysis and medicine (e.g., in psychiatry to assess how well students’ diagnoses on a set of test cases agree with expert answers) (Grove et al. 1981). Carletta (1996) deserves the credit for bringing κ to the attention of computational linguists. κ is computed as P(A) − P(E) 1 − P(E) , where P(A) is the observed agreement among the coders, and P(E) is the expected agreement, that is, P(E) represents the probability that the coders agree by chance. The values of κ are constrained to the interval [−1,1]. A κ value of one means perfect agreement, a κ value of zero means that agreement is equal to chance, and a κ value of negative one means “perfect” disagreement. This squib addresses two issues that have been neglected in the computational linguistics literature. First, there are two main ways of computing P(E), the expected agreement, according to whether the distribution of proportions over the categories is taken to be equal for the coders (Scott 1955; Fleiss 1971; Krippendorff 1980; Siegel and Castellan 1988) or not (Cohen 1960). Clearly, the two approaches reflect different conceptualizations of the problem. We believe the distinction between the two is often glossed over because in practice the two computations of P(E) produce very similar outcomes in most cases, especially for the highest values of κ. However, first, we will show that they can indeed result in different values of κ, that we will call κCo (Cohen 1960) and κS&C (Siegel and Castellan 1988). These different values can lead to contradictory conclusions on intercoder agreement. Moreover, the assumption of equal distributions over the categories masks the exact source of disagreement among the coders. Thus, such an assumption is detrimental if such systematic disagreements are to be used to improve the coding scheme (Wiebe, Bruce, and O’Hara 1999). Second, κ is affected by skewed distributions of categories (the prevalence problem) and by the degree to which the coders disagree (the bias problem). That is, for a fixed P(A), the values of κ vary substantially in the presence of prevalence, bias, or both. We will conclude by suggesting that κCo is a better choice than κS&C in those studies in which the assumption of equal distributions underlying κS&C does not hold: the vast majority, if not all, of discourse- and dialogue-tagging efforts. However, as κCo suffers from the bias problem but κS&C does not, κS&C should be reported too, as well as a third measure that corrects for prevalence, as suggested in Byrt, Bishop, and Carlin (1993).
1.. P(E) is the probability of agreement among coders due to chance. The literature describes two different methods for estimating a probability distribution for random assignment of categories. In the first, each coder has a personal distribution, based on that coder’s distribution of categories (Cohen 1960). In the second, there is one distribution for all coders, derived from the total proportions of categories assigned by all coders (Scott 1955; Fleiss 1971; Krippendorff 1980; Siegel and Castellan 1988).1 We now illustrate the computation of P(E) according to these two methods. We will then show that the resulting κCo and κS&C may straddle one of the significant thresholds used to assess the raw κ values. The assumptions underlying these two methods are made tangible in the way the data are visualized, in a contingency table for Cohen, and in what we will call an agreement table for the others. Consider the following situation. Two coders2 code 150 occurrences of Okay and assign to them one of the two labels Accept or Ack(nowledgement) (Allen and Core 1997). The two coders label 70 occurrences as Accept, and another 55 as Ack. They disagree on 25 occurrences, which one coder labels as Ack, and the other as Accept. In Figure 1, this example is encoded by the top contingency table on the left (labeled Example 1) and the agreement table on the right. The contingency table directly mirrors our description. The agreement table is an N × m matrix, where N is the number of items in the data set and m is the number of labels that can be assigned to each object; in our example, N = 150 and m = 2. Each entry nij is the number of codings of label j to item i. The agreement table in Figure 1 shows that occurrences 1 through 70 have been labeled as Accept by both coders, 71 through 125 as Ack by both coders, and 126 to 150 differ in their labels. 1 To be precise, Krippendorff uses a computation very similar to Siegel and Castellan’s to produce a statistic called alpha. Krippendorff computes P(E) (called 1 − De in his terminology) with a sampling-without-replacement methodology. The computations of P(E) and of 1 − De show that the difference is negligible: Cohen’s contingency tables (left) and Siegel and Castellan’s agreement table (right). Agreement tables lose information. When the coders disagree, we cannot reconstruct which coder picked which category. Consider Example 2 in Figure 1. The two coders still disagree on 25 occurrences of Okay. However, one coder now labels 10 of those as Accept and the remaining 15 as Ack, whereas the other labels the same 10 as Ack and the same 15 as Accept. The agreement table does not change, but the contingency table does. Turning now to computing P(E), Figure 2 shows, for Example 1, Cohen’s computation of P(E) on the left, and Siegel and Castellan’s computation on the right. We include the computations of KCo and KS&C as the last step. For both Cohen and Siegel and Castellan, P(A) = 125/150 = 0.8333. The observed agreement P(A) is computed as the proportion of items the coders agree on to the total number of items; N is the number of items, and k the number of coders (N = 150 and k = 2 in our example). Both KCo and KS&C are highly significant at the p = 0.5 ∗ 10−5 level (significance is computed for KCo and KS&C according to the formulas in Cohen [1960] and Siegel and Castellan [1988], respectively). The difference between KCo and KS&C in Figure 2 is just under 1%, however, the results of the two K computations straddle the value 0.67, which for better or worse has been adopted as a cutoff in computational linguistics. This cutoff is based on the assessment of K values in Krippendorff (1980), which discounts K < 0.67 and allows tentative conclusions when 0.67 < K < 0.8 and definite conclusions when K ≥ 0.8. Krippendorff’s scale has been adopted without question, even though Krippendorff himself considers it only a plausible standard that has emerged from his and his colleagues’ work. In fact, Carletta et al. (1997) use words of caution against adopting Krippendorff’s suggestion as a standard; the first author has also raised the issue of how to assess K values in Di Eugenio (2000). If Krippendorff’s scale is supposed to be our standard, the example just worked out shows that the different computations of P(E) do affect the assessment of intercoder agreement. If less-strict scales are adopted, the discrepancies between the two K computations play a larger role, as they have a larger effect on smaller values of K. For example, Rietveld and van Hout (1993) consider 0.20 < K < 0.40 as indicating fair agreement, and 0.40 < K < 0.60 as indicating moderate agreement. Suppose that two coders are coding 100 occurrences of Okay. The two coders label 40 occurrences as Accept and 25 as Ack. The remaining 35 are labeled as Ack by one coder and as Accept by the other (as in Example 6 in Figure 4); KCo = 0.418, but KS&C = 0.27. These two values are really at odds. Step 1. For each category j, compute the overall proportion pj,l of items assigned to j by each coder l. In a contingency table, each row and column total divided by N corresponds to one such proportion for the corresponding coder. Assumption of equal distributions among coders (Siegel and Castellan) Step 1. For each category j, compute pj, the overall proportion of items assigned to j. In an agreement table, the column totals give the total counts for each category j, hence: Step 3. P(E), the likelihood of coders’ accidentally assigning the same category to a given item, is The computation of P(E) and κ according to Cohen (left) and to Siegel and Castellan (right).
2.. In the computational linguistics literature, r. has been used mostly to validate coding schemes: Namely, a “good” value of r. means that the coders agree on the categories and therefore that those categories are “real.” We noted previously that assessing what constitutes a “good” value for r. is problematic in itself and that different scales have been proposed. The problem is compounded by the following obvious effect on r. values: If P(A) is kept constant, varying values for P(E) yield varying values of r.. What can affect P(E) even if P(A) is constant are prevalence and bias. The prevalence problem arises because skewing the distribution of categories in the data increases P(E). The minimum value P(E) = 1/m occurs when the labels are equally distributed among the m categories (see Example 4 in Figure 3). The maximum value P(E) = 1 occurs when the labels are all concentrated in a single category. But for a given value of P(A), the larger the value of P(E), the lower the value of r.. Example 3 and Example 4 in Figure 3 show two coders agreeing on 90 out of 100 occurrences of Okay, that is, P(A) = 0.9. However, r. ranges from −0.048 to 0.80, and from not significant to significant (the values of r.S&C for Examples 3 and 4 are the same as the values of r.Co).3 The differences in r. are due to the difference in the relative prevalence of the two categories Accept and Ack. In Example 3, the distribution is skewed, as there are 190 Accepts but only 10 Acks across the two coders; in Example 4, the distribution is even, as there are 100 Accepts and 100 Acks, respectively. These results do not depend on the size of the sample; that is, they are not due to the fact Contingency tables illustrating the bias effect on κCo. Example 3 and Example 4 are small. As the computations of P(A) and P(E) are based on proportions, the same distributions of categories in a much larger sample, say, 10,000 items, will result in exactly the same κ values. Although this behavior follows squarely from κ’s definition, it is at odds with using κ to assess a coding scheme. From both Example 3 and Example 4 we would like to conclude that the two coders are in substantial agreement, independent of the skewed prevalence of Accept with respect to Ack in Example 3. The role of prevalence in assessing κ has been subject to heated discussion in the medical literature (Grove et al. 1981; Berry 1992; Goldman 1992). The bias problem occurs in κCo but not κS&C. For κCo, P(E) is computed from each coder’s individual probabilities. Thus, the less two coders agree in their overall behavior, the fewer chance agreements are expected. But for a given value of P(A), decreasing P(E) will increase κCo, leading to the paradox that κCo increases as the coders become less similar, that is, as the marginal totals diverge in the contingency table. Consider two coders coding the usual 100 occurrences of Okay, according to the two tables in Figure 4. In Example 5, the proportions of each category are very similar among coders, at 55 versus 60 Accept, and 45 versus 40 Ack. However, in Example 6 coder 1 favors Accept much more than coder 2 (75 versus 40 occurrences) and conversely chooses Ack much less frequently (25 versus 60 occurrences). In both cases, P(A) is 0.65 and κS&C is stable at 0.27, but κCo goes from 0.27 to 0.418. Our initial example in Figure 1 is also affected by bias. The distribution in Example 1 yielded κCo = 0.6724 but κS&C = 0.6632. If the bias decreases as in Example 2, κCo becomes 0.6632, the same as κS&C.
3.. The issue that remains open is which computation of κ to choose. Siegel and Castellan’s κS&C is not affected by bias, whereas Cohen’s κCo is. However, it is questionable whether the assumption of equal distributions underlying κS&C is appropriate for coding in discourse and dialogue work. In fact, it appears to us that it holds in few if any of the published discourse- or dialogue-tagging efforts for which κ has been computed. It is, for example, appropriate in situations in which item i may be tagged by different coders than item j (Fleiss 1971). However, κ assessments for discourse and dialogue tagging are most often performed on the same portion of the data, which has been annotated by each of a small number of annotators (between two and four). In fact, in many cases the analysis of systematic disagreements among annotators on the same portion of the data (i.e., of bias) can be used to improve the coding scheme (Wiebe, Bruce, and O’Hara 1999). To use κCo but to guard against bias, Cicchetti and Feinstein (1990) suggest that κCo be supplemented, for each coding category, by two measures of agreement, positive and negative, between the coders. This means a total of 2m additional measures, which we believe are too many to gain a general insight into the meaning of the specific κCo value. Alternatively, Byrt, Bishop, and Carlin (1993) suggest that intercoder reliability be reported as three numbers: κCo and two adjustments of κCo, one with bias removed, the other with prevalence removed. The value of κCo adjusted for bias turns out to be ... κS&C. Adjusted for prevalence, κCo yields a measure that is equal to 2P(A) − 1. The results for Example 1 should then be reported as κCo = 0.6724, κS&C = 0.6632, 2P(A)−1 = 0.6666; those for Example 6 as κCo = 0.418, κS&C = 0.27, and 2P(A)−1 = 0.3. For both Examples 3 and 4, 2P(A) − 1 = 0.8. Collectively, these three numbers appear to provide a means of better judging the meaning of κ values. Reporting both κ and 2P(A) − 1 may seem contradictory, as 2P(A) − 1 does not correct for expected agreement. However, when the distribution of categories is skewed, this highlights the effect of prevalence. Reporting both κCo and κS&C does not invalidate our previous discussion, as we believe κCo is more appropriate for discourse- and dialogue-tagging in the majority of cases, especially when exploiting bias to improve coding (Wiebe, Bruce, and O’Hara 1999).
Acknowledgments. This work is supported by grant N00014-00-1-0640 from the Office of Naval Research. Thanks to Janet Cahn and to the anonymous reviewers for comments on earlier drafts.