1 Introduction. Despite a surge in research using parallel corpora for various machine translation tasks (Brown et al. 1993),(Brown et al. 1991; Gale & Church 1993; Church 1993; Dagan & Church 1994; Simard et al. 1992; Chen 1993; Melamed 1995; Wu & Xia 1994; Wu 1994; Smadja et al. 1996), the amount of available bilingual parallel corpora is still relatively small in comparison to the large amount of available monolingual text. It is unlikely that one can find parallel corpora in any given domain in electronic form. This is a particularly acute problem in language pairs such as Chinese/English or Japanese/English where there are fewer translated texts than in European language pairs. While we should make use of any existing parallel corpora as lexical translation resources, we should not ignore the even larger amount of monolingual text. However, using non-parallel corpora for lexical translation has been a daunting task, considered much more difficult than that with parallel corpora. In this paper, we present an initial algorithm for translating technical terms using a pair of non-parallel corpora. Evaluation results show translation precisions at around 30% when only the top candidate is considered. While this precision is lower than that achieved with parallel corpora, we show that top 20 candidate output from our algorithm allows translators to increase their accuracy by 50.9%. In the following sections, we first describe a pair of non-parallel corpora we use for experiments, and then we introduce the Word Relation Matrix (WoRM), a statistical word feature representation for technical term translation from non-parallel corpora. We evaluate the effectiveness of this feature with two sets of experiments, using English/English, and English/Japanese non-parallel corpora.
2 Related work. Few attempts have been made to explore non-parallel corpora of monolingual texts in the same domain. Early work uses a pair of non-parallel texts for the task of lexical disambiguation between several senses of a word (Dagan 1990). This basic idea extends to choosing a translation among multiple candidates (Dagan & Itai 1994) given collocation information. A similar idea is later applied by (Rapp 1995) to show the plausibility of correlations between words in non-parallel text. He proposed a matrix permutation method matching co-occurrence patterns in two non-parallel texts, but noted that computational limitations hamper further extension of this method. Using the same idea, (Tanaka & Iwasaki 1996) demonstrated how to eliminate candidate words in a bilingual dictionary. All the above works point to a certain discriminatory feature in monolingual texts — context and word relations. However, these works remain in the realm of solving ambiguities or choosing the best candidate among a small set of possibilities. It is argued in (Gale & Church 1994) that feature vectors of 100,000 dimensions are likely to be needed for high resolution discriminant analysis. It is so far questionable whether feature vectors of lower dimensions are discriminating enough for extracting bilingual lexical pairs from nonparallel corpora with a large number of candidates. Is it possible to achieve bilingual lexicon translation by looking at words in relation to other words? In this paper, we hope to shed some light on this question.
3 Two pilot non-parallel corpora. In our experiments, we use two sets of non-parallel corpora: (1) Wall Street Journal (WSJ) from 1993 and 1994, divided into two non-overlapping parts. Each resulting English corpus has 10.36M bytes of data. (2) Wall Street Journal in English and Nikkei Financial News in Japanese, from the same time period. The WSJ text contains 49M bytes of data, and the Nikkei 127M bytes. Since the Nikkei is encoded in two-byte Japanese character sets, the latter is equivalent to about 60M bytes of data in English. The English Wall Street Journal non-parallel corpus gives us an easier test set on which to start. The output of this corpus should consist of words matching to themselves as translations. It is useful as a baseline evaluation test set providing an estimate on performance. The WSJ/Nikkei corpus is the most non-parallel type of corpus. In addition to being written in languages across linguistic families by different journalists, WSJ/Nikkei also share only a limited amount of common topic. The Wall Street Journal tends to focus on 'U.S. domestic economic and political news, whereas the Nikkei Financial News focuses on economic and political events in Japan and in Asia. Due to the large difference in content, language, writing style, we consider this corpus more difficult than others. However, the result we obtain from this corpus gives us a lower-bound on the performance of our algorithm.
4 An algorithm for finding terminology translations from non-parallel corpora. Bilingual lexicon translation algorithms for parallel corpora in general make use of fixed correlations between a pair of bilingual terms, reflected in their frequent co-occurrences in translated texts, to find lexicon translations. We use correlations both between monolingual lexical units, and between bilingual or multilingual lexical units, to find a consistent pattern which is represented as statistical word features for translation. We illustrate the possible correlations using the word debentures in the two different parts of WSJ. Figure 1 shows segments from both texts containing the word debentures. Universal said its 15 3/4% debentures due Dec sold $75 million of 6% debentures priced at par and due Sept sold $40 million of 6 1/4% convertible debentures priced at par and due March 15 GTE offered a $250 million issue of 8 1/2% debentures due in 30 years $250 million of notes due 1997 and $250 million of debentures due 2017 sold $300 million of 7 1/2% convertible debentures due 2012 at par said it agreed to issue $125 million Canadian in convertible debentures senior subordinated debentures was offered through Drexel said it completed the redemption of all $16 million of its 9% subordinated debentures due 2003 Moody's assigned a Baa-3 rating to a proposed $100 million convertible subordinated debenture it and its 12 1/2% senior subordinated debentures at par $20 million of convertible debentures due June 1 issues of $110 million of senior notes due 1997 and $115 million of convertible debentures due said it reached an agreement with holders of $30 million of its convertible subordinated debentui downgraded the subordinated debentures of Bank of Montreal common shares and $35 million of convertible debentures due 2012 $35 million of convertible debentures due May 15 financed with $450 million of new Western Union senior secured debentures to be placed by Dre Commission to issue as much as $125 million of 30-year debentures packaged with common stoc to redeem its entire $55 million face amount of 8 3/4% convertible subordinated debentures dul Figure 1 shows that: We use online dictionaries to provide the it seed word lists. To avoid problems of polysemy and nonstandardization in dictionary entries, we choose a more reliable, less ambiguous subset of dictionary entries as the seed word list. This subset contains dictionary entries which occur at midrange frequency in the corpus so that they are more likely to be content words. They must occur in both sides of the non-parallel corpora, and have fewer number of candidate translations. Such seed words serve as the textual anchor points in non-parallel corpora. For example, we obtained 1,416 entries from the Japanese/English online dictionary EDICT using these criteria.
5 A word in relation to seed words. Word correlations are important statistical information which has been successfully employed to find bilingual word pairs from parallel corpora. Word correlations W(w, , wt) are computed from general likelihood scores based on the co-occurrence of words in common segments. Segments are either sentences, paragraphs, or string groups delimited by anchor points: where a = number of segments where both words occur number of segments where only w3 occur c = number of segments where only wt occur d = number of segments where neither words occur All correlation measures use the above likelihood scores in different formulations. In our Word Relation Matrix (WoRM) representation, we use the correlation measure W(w, , tat) between a seed word tv, and an unknown word tv,„ a, b, c and d are computed from the segments in the monolingual text of the non-parallel corpus. W(wz, w5) is the weighted mutual information in our algorithm since it is most suitable for lexicon compilation of mid-frequency technical words or terms: As an initial step, all Pr(w, = 1) are pre-computed for the seed words in both languages. We have experimented with various segment sizes, ranging from phrases delimited by all punctuations, a sentence, to an entire paragraph. From our experiment results, we conclude that the right segment size is a function of the frequency of the seed words: segment size oc frequency(W,) If the seed words are frequent, and if the segment size is as large as a paragraph size, then these frequent seed words could occur in every single segment. In this case, the chances for co-occurrence between such seed words and all new words are very high, close to one. With large segments, such seed words are too biasing and thus, smaller segment size must be used. Conversely, we need a larger segment size if seed word frequency is low. Consequently, we use the paragraph as the segment size for our experiment on Wall Street Journal/Nikkei Corpus since all the seed words are mid-frequency content words. We computed all binary vectors of the 1,416 seed words w, where the i-th dimension of the vector is 1 if the seed word occurs in the i-th paragraph in the text, zero otherwise. We use a smaller segment size — between any two punctuations — for the segment size for the Wall Street Journal English/English corpus since many of the seed words are frequent. Next, Pr(wz = 1) is computed for all unknown words z in both texts. The WoRM vectors are then sorted according to W(wz, w,i). The most correlated seed word w„. ; will have the top scoring W(wz, As an example, using 307 seed word pairs in the WSJ/WSJ corpus, we obtain the following most correlated seed words with debentures in two different years of Wall Street Journal as shown in Figure 2. In both texts, the same set of words correlate with debenture closely. WoRM plots of debentures and administration are shown in Figures 3 and 4 respectively. The horizontal axis has 307 points representing the seed words, the vertical axis has the value of the correlation scores between these 307 seed words and our example words. These figures show that WoRMs of the same words are similar to each other, but WoRMs are different between different words.
6 Matching Word Relation Matrices. When all unknown words are represented in WoRMs, a matching function is needed to find the best WoRM pairs as bilingual lexicon entries. There are many metrics we can use to measure the closeness of two WoRMs. When matching vectors are very similar such as those in the WSJ English/English corpus, a simple metric like the Euclidean Distance could be used to find those matching pairs: However, most word pairs in truly non-parallel bilingual corpus are less similar than those in Figure 3. The y value of a new word is high when there is a x-th seed word which co-occurs with it significantly often. If a pair of bilingual words are supposed to be translations of each other, they should share the most significant y values. In this case, the Cosine Measure would be more appropriate where: CEl<i<n(W.s, &quot; = VEW82. - Ewq The Cosine Measure will give the highest value to vector pairs which share the most non-zero y values. Therefore, it favors word pairs which share the most number of closely related seed words. However, the Cosine Measure is also directly proportional to another parameter, namely the actual (w,, x wt,) values. Consequently, if w, has a high y value everywhere, then the Cosine Measure between any tot and this w, would be high. This violates our assumptions in that although w, and wt might not correlate closely with the same set of seed words, the matching score would be nevertheless high. This is another supporting reason for choosing mid-frequency content words as seed words.
7 Evaluation 1: Matching English words to English. The evaluation on the WSJ/WSJ English/English corpus is intended as a pilot test on the discriminative power of the Word Relation Matrix. This non-parallel corpus has minimal content and style differences. Furthermore, using such an English/English test set, the output can be evaluated automatically—a translated pair is considered correct if they are identical English words. 307 seed words are chosen according to their occurrence frequency (400-3900) to minimize the number of function words. However, a frequency of 3900 in a corpus of 1.5M words is quite high. As a result, a segment delimited by two punctuations is used as the context window size. Furthermore, the frequent nature of the seed words led to our choice of the Euclidean Distance, instead of the Cosine Measure. The choices of segment size, seed words, and Euclidean Distance measure are all direct consequences of the atypical nature of the English/English pilot test set. We selected a test set of 582 (set A) by 687 (set B) single words with mid-range frequency from the WSJ texts. We computed the WoRM feature for each of these test words and computed the Euclidean Distance between every word in these sets. We then calculated the accuracy by counting the number of words whose top one candidate is identical to itself, obtaining a precision of 29%. By allowing N-top candidates, the accuracy improves as shown in the graphs for 582 words output in Figure 5 (i.e. a translation is correct if it appears among the first N candidates). If we find the correct translation among the top 100 candidates, we obtain a precision of around 58%. N-top candidates are useful as translator aids. Meanwhile, precisions for translating less polysemous content words are higher. If only the 445 content words (manually selected) are kept from the 582-word set, the precisions at different top N candidates for the 445-word set are higher as shown in Figure 5 by the dotted line. We believe the accuracy would be even higher if we only look at really unambiguous test words, such as an entire technical term. It is well known that polysemous words usually have only one sense when used as part of a collocation or technical term (Yarowsky 1993).
8 Evaluation 2: Matching Japanese terms to English. Evaluations are also carried out on the Wall Street Journal and Nikkei Financial News corpus, matching technical terms in Japanese to their counterpart in English. This evaluation is a difficult test case because (1) the two languages, English and Japanese, are across language groups; (2) the two texts, Wall Street Journal and Nikkei Financial News, do not focus on the same topics; and (3) the two texts are not written by the same authors. 1,416 entries from the Japanese/English online dictionary EDICT with occurrence frequencies between 100 and 1000 are chosen as seed words. Since these seed words have relatively low frequencies compared to the corpus size of around 7 million words for the WSJ text, we chose the segment size to be that of an entire paragraph. For the same reason, the Cosine Measure is chosen as a matching function. For evaluation, we need to select a test set of known technical term translations. We handtranslated a selected set of technical terms from the Nikkei Financial News corpus and looked them up in the Wall Street Journal text. Among these, 19 terms, shown in Figure 6, have their counterparts in the WSJ text. Three evaluations were carried out. In all cases, a translation is counted as correct if the top candidate is the right one. Test I tries to find the correct translation for each of the nineteen Japanese terms among the nineteen English terms. To increase the candidate numbers, test II is carried out on 19 Japanese terms with their English counterparts plus 293 other English terms, giving a, total of 312 possible English candidates. The third test set III consists of the nineteen Japanese terms paired with their translations and 383 single English words in addition. The accuracies for the three test sets are shown in Figure 7; precision ranges from 21.1% to 52.6%. Figure 8 shows the ranking of the true translations among all the candidates for all 19 cases for the purpose of a translator-aid. Most of the correct translations can be found among the top 20 candidates. The previous two evaluations show that the precision of best-candidate translation using our algorithm is around 30% on average. While it is far from ideal, this is the first result of terminology translation from non-parallel corpora. Meanwhile, we have found that the correct translation is often among the top 20 candidates. This leads us to conjecture that the output from this algorithm can be used as a translator-aid. To evaluate this, we again chose the nineteen English/Japanese terms from the WSJ/Nikkei non-parallel corpus as a test set. We chose three evaluators who are all native Chinese speakers with bilingual knowledge in English and Chinese. Chinese speakers are able to recognize most Japanese technical terms since they are very similar to Chinese. We asked them to translate these nineteen Japanese terms into English without using dictionaries or other reference material. The translators have some general knowledge of international news. However, none of them specializes in economics or finance, which is the domain of the WSJ/Nikkei corpus. Their output is in SET A. Our system then proposes two sets of outputs: (1) for each Japanese term, our system proposes the top-20 candidates from the set of 312 noun phrases. Using this candidate list, the translators again translate the nineteen terms. Their output based on this information is in SETH; (2) for each Japanese term, our system proposes the top-20 candidates from the set containing 383 single words plus the nineteen terms. The result of human translation based on this candidate list is in SET C. Sets A, B and C are all compared to the original translation in the corpus. If the translation is the same as in the corpus, then it is judged as correct. The results are shown in Figure 9. Evaluators on average are able to translate 8 terms out of 19 by themselves, whereas they can translate 18 terms on average with the aid of our output. Translation precision increases on the average by 50.9%.
9 Conclusion. We have described a statistical word signature feature, the Word Relation Matrix, that can be used to find matching pairs of content words or terms in a pair of same-domain non-parallel bilingual texts. Evaluation shows a precision of about 30%. We showed that humans are able to translate more than twice as many Japanese technical terms into English when our system output is used, compared to translating a random set of 19 Japanese terms without aid. It is also a significant initial result for lexical translation from truly non-parallel corpora, particularly across language groups. For future work, the quality of seed words can be improved by using a training algorithm to select seed words according to their discriminative power. The dimensionality of WoRM vectors we have chosen is not optimal. A high dimensionality of vectors is usually favorable (Gale & Church 1994). On the other hand, high dimensionality can also lead to noise, Therefore, dimensionality reduction methods such as the Singular Value Decomposition (Shiitze 1992) or clustering is often used. In our case, this means that we should choose a large subset of highly discriminative seed word pairs. Additionally, the Word Relation Matrix could be used in combination with other word signature features for non-parallel corpora. In addition to the evaluation results, we have also discovered that the content words in the same segment with a word or term all contribute to the occurrence of this word. This feature represents some of the long-distance relations between the word and multiple other words which are not its immediate neighbors. The information can be used in language modeling in addition to the currently popular N-gram models and word trigger pairs.